
=== Page 1 ===
 
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Applied Soft Computing
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/asoc
 
Efficient dual-branch high-resolution transformer design for crack 
segmentation
Yongshang Li a, c,∗iD, Zihan Ma b iD, Ronggui Ma c
a School of Artificial Intelligence, Zhongyuan University of Technology, Zhengzhou, 450007, Henan, China
b Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20742, USA
c School of Information Engineering, Chang’an University, Xi’an, 710064, Shaanxi, China
H I G H L I G H T S
• An efficiently designed dual-branch high-resolution transformer model for crack segmentation.
• A multi-scale spatial-reduction attention mechanism is incorporated in the high-resolution branch for detail extraction.
• An enhanced ReLU-based linear attention mechanism is implemented in the low-resolution branch for learning global features.
• A bidirectional cross-resolution feature enhancer is introduced to effectively integrate multi-scale features across different branches.
A R T I C L E  I N F O
Keywords:
Crack segmentation
Transformer
Efficient self-attention
High-resolution dense prediction
Dual-branch network
A B S T R A C T
Recent studies show that Transformer-based crack segmentation models deliver impressive results. However, due 
to the quadratic complexity of the self-attention mechanism, the computational cost becomes prohibitive when 
handling high-resolution dense prediction tasks. This paper presents an efficient Transformer-based network for 
crack segmentation, utilizing several specially optimized self-attention modules. The proposed model incorporates 
a dual-branch structure, consisting of a high-resolution branch that maintains high resolution throughout and a 
low-resolution branch that progressively reduces resolution. A multi-scale spatial-reduction attention is intro­
duced to the high-resolution branch to capture fine details, while an enhanced ReLU-based linear attention in the 
low-resolution branch learns global features. A bidirectional cross-resolution feature enhancement module con­
nects the two branches, facilitating comprehensive information fusion. On the combined dataset CrackSeg9k and 
the scenario-specific datasets Asphalt3k and Concrete3k, the proposed method obtains mIoU of 81.85 %, 81.29 %, 
and 86.36 %, respectively, which outperforms the comparative state-of-the-art models and also achieves the best 
trade-off between efficiency and performance. Additionally, a robustness benchmark on common corruptions 
shows the proposed model degrades less than comparable lightweight baselines.
1 . Introduction
In civil engineering, the appearance of cracks is often a precursor to 
structural damage, making early recognition and assessment of cracks 
crucial [1]. Traditional crack detection methods rely on manual visual 
inspection, which is not only time-consuming and labor-intensive but 
also prone to subjective judgment, leading to inconsistent detection re­
sults. With the rapid development of computer vision, automated crack 
detection technology has emerged to revolutionize structural health 
monitoring.
Automated crack detection technology typically leverages functional 
image acquisition devices and advanced image processing algorithms 
to achieve rapid crack recognition and precise measurement [2,3]. The 
current trend is to design automated detection systems integrated with 
advanced artificial intelligence (AI) algorithms [4,5]. These systems 
are capable of automatically identify crack characteristics, including 
length, width, and depth, and even assess the rate and trend of crack 
development. The application of AI technology can significantly en­
hance the efficiency and accuracy of crack detection, while reducing 
the interference of human factors.
∗Corresponding author at: School of Artificial Intelligence, Zhongyuan University of Technology, Zhengzhou, 450007, Henan, China.
 
Email addresses: yshli@zut.edu.cn (Y. Li), zihanma@umd.edu (Z. Ma), rgma@chd.edu.cn (R. Ma).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.asoc.2025.114513
Received 11 March 2025; Received in revised form 31 October 2025; Accepted 21 December 2025
Applied Soft Computing Journal 189 (2026) 114513 
Available online 22 December 2025 
1568-4946/© 2025 Elsevier B.V. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 

=== Page 2 ===
Y. Li, Z. Ma and R. Ma
Currently, convolutional neural networks (CNNs) dominate intelli­
gent crack detection methods, with their success primarily attributed to 
the inherent spatial inductive biases, namely locality and translation in­
variance [5]. These characteristics enable CNNs to efficiently learn and 
extract local features from images, making them particularly effective in 
crack detection tasks. By focusing on local regions of the image, CNNs 
can accurately identify and locate cracks, maintaining high performance 
regardless of variations in crack morphology and position. Although 
CNNs have demonstrated excellent performance in crack detection, they 
still face several challenges and limitations. Firstly, to improve compu­
tational efficiency and reduce the number of parameters, modern CNNs 
typically use small convolutional kernels, such as 3 × 3 or 5 × 5 [6]. 
While such design effectively captures fine local features, it limits the 
model’s ability to capture global context. As a result, CNNs perform less 
effectively in modeling large-scale global information, making it diffi­
cult to fully leverage the structural information of the entire image for 
more accurate predictions. Secondly, the locality of CNNs makes them 
more sensitive to noise in images [7,8]. Since CNNs primarily rely on the 
relationships between pixels in local regions, the presence of noise or in­
terference in an image can lead the model to incorrectly identify these 
pixels as meaningful features, thus compromising accuracy. This sensi­
tivity to noise not only diminishes the model’s robustness but also limits 
its generalization ability, meaning that the model may underperform 
when dealing with unseen or differently distributed data.
The emergence of Transformer has effectively addressed the lim­
itations of CNNs, with its widely adopted self-attention mechanism 
proving highly effective in handling long-range dependencies and in­
herently possessing a global receptive field [9]. A comparison between 
CNN and self-attention is shown in Fig. 1. The introduction of Vision 
Transformer (ViT) has further demonstrated the significant potential 
of the self-attention mechanism in computer vision [10]. However, 
the computational complexity of the self-attention mechanism scales 
quadratically with the input sequence length, making the computational 
cost prohibitive when dealing with high-resolution features [11,12]. 
Despite the remarkable advantages of Transformer in capturing global 
features and managing long-range dependencies, its high computational 
and memory demands limit its practical application in high-resolution 
dense prediction.
Based on the above observations, there is clearly a significant gap 
between Transformer-based models and the accurate and efficient crack 
detection, making these models impractical for real-world applications. 
To bridge this gap, this paper proposes an Efficient Crack Transformer 
(ECFormer). ECFormer adopts a dual-branch structure, with the core 
innovation being the use of a customized efficient attention mech­
anism for each branch. This design endows the model with both a 
global receptive field and multi-scale learning capability, which are 
crucial for crack segmentation. Compared to pure-Transformer mod­
els, ECFormer significantly improves computational efficiency while 
maintaining performance. Specifically, a multi-scale spatial-reduction 
attention mechanism is designed to capture crack features at different 
scales in the high-resolution branch, while an enhanced ReLU-based 
linear attention mechanism with a global receptive field is applied 
in the low-resolution branch to extract contextual crack information. 
To facilitate comprehensive information exchange between the two 
branches, a bidirectional cross-resolution feature enhancer bridges the 
two branches, enabling thorough communication. The effectiveness 
of ECFormer is demonstrated through its performance on multiple 
crack segmentation benchmarks, and comparisons with state-of-the-art 
models show that it greatly reduces computational cost while preserv­
ing performance. The contributions of this paper are summarized as
follows:
• A high-resolution dual-branch Transformer-based model called 
ECFormer is proposed for efficient crack segmentation tasks.
• In the ECFormer’s high-resolution branch, a multi-scale spatial-
reduction attention mechanism is designed to extract detailed 
Fig. 1. Comparison of CNN and self-attention.
features, while in the low-resolution branch, an enhanced ReLU-
based linear attention mechanism is developed to capture global fea­
tures. Additionally, a bidirectional cross-resolution feature enhancer 
is designed to facilitate information exchange between the two
branches.
• ECFormer achieves the best performance compared to the state-
of-the-art models on the combined dataset CrackSeg9k and the 
scenario-specific datasets Concrete3k and Asphalt3k, and achieves 
the best trade-off between performance and efficiency.
• A focused robustness evaluation benchmark on CrackSeg9k, covering 
Gaussian noise, motion blur, brightness shifts, and JPEG compres­
sion, with five severities and an aggregate robustness score.
2 . Related work
There are three lines of work related to this study. The first is general 
research on crack segmentation, which mainly includes rule-based and 
data-driven methods. The second focuses on crack segmentation based 
on Transformers, and the third involves improvement efforts aimed at 
addressing the limitations of Transformer.
2.1 . Generic crack segmentation
The essence of image segmentation is to partition an image into mul­
tiple regions with consistency and coherence, thereby extracting the 
semantic information of the target objects or scenes and achieving a 
structured understanding of the image content. Crack segmentation is a 
specific application of image segmentation, aiming to extract crack re­
gions from an image and distinguish them from the background. Over 
the past decade, crack segmentation has made substantial progress, 
evolving from early global threshold-based techniques to advanced deep 
learning algorithms. Based on the decision-making criteria, existing 
crack segmentation methods can be broadly categorized into two groups, 
rule-based methods and data-driven methods.
Rule-based methods rely on predefined rules, algorithms, or do­
main knowledge to achieve crack segmentation. These methods typically 
employ thresholding, edge detection, region growing, or clustering tech­
niques, dividing regions based on conditions such as pixel intensity, 
color characteristics, or geometric features of the image.
Among rule-based approaches, thresholding and edge-based meth­
ods are the most commonly used due to their simplicity and intuitive 
nature. When the intensity distribution between crack and background 
Applied Soft Computing 189 (2026) 114513 
2 

=== Page 3 ===
Y. Li, Z. Ma and R. Ma
pixels is significantly different, a global threshold can be applied to 
the entire image, known as the global thresholding method [13–17].
The main advantages of the global thresholding method are simplicity 
and computational efficiency. However, it fails when the assumption 
of two peaks in the histogram is violated. This is because, while the 
histogram provides quantitative information about the pixel intensity 
distribution, it neglects the spatial relationships and structural informa­
tion between pixels, which are crucial for understanding and analyzing 
image content. To overcome this limitation, many studies have adopted 
methods that set thresholds based on local information [18,19]. These 
approaches not only consider the pixel’s intensity but also its statistical 
properties within the local neighborhood, such as the mean, variance, 
or other texture features of the local region.
Threshold-based crack detection methods typically perform well 
in ideal imaging conditions, such as when cracks are clearly visible 
and lighting is uniform. However, real-world images are often influ­
enced by background textures and varying lighting conditions, which 
introduce multiple types of noise during data acquisition. These fac­
tors make it more challenging to establish an effective threshold for 
distinguishing between crack and non-crack pixels. Moreover, cracks 
exhibit significant morphological characteristics in terms of size, topol­
ogy, continuity, and contour. As a result, many approaches exploit the 
morphological characteristics of cracks to develop more robust detec­
tion algorithms, with edge-based methods being the most common due 
to the intuitive similarity between cracks and edges in terms of both 
topology and morphology. Filter-based methods have been widely ap­
plied to crack detection [20–23], with common spatial filters such as 
the Canny [24] and Sobel [25]. At the same time, to address the sen­
sitivity of these spatial filters to geometric transformations, researchers 
developed crack detection methods based on frequency-domain filtering
[26–29].
Filter-based methods rely on local gradient variations in the image, 
but random intensity fluctuations caused by noise can generate false 
edges, resulting in false detection. Additionally, filter-based methods are 
inadequate when dealing with discontinuous or morphologically com­
plex cracks. These limitations prompted researchers to seek more robust 
crack detection approaches, with morphological methods and active 
contour models gaining significant attention. Morphological methods do 
not rely on intensity gradients but instead enhance or extract morpho­
logical features in the image by applying specific operations, such as 
dilation, erosion. These methods are commonly used in post-processing 
to refine edge detection results, remove noise, fill cracks, and connect 
discontinuities [30–32]. Active contour models iteratively evolve an ini­
tial contour in the image to adaptively approach crack edges. Since they 
rely on a global energy minimization process, they are better suited 
to handle discontinuous edges and track complex crack morphologies 
[33–35]. This adaptive characteristic makes them particularly effective 
for crack detection tasks in the presence of noise or irregular crack 
shapes. However, whether threshold-based or edge-based, these meth­
ods rely on predefined rules, which perform well when cracks exhibit 
clear, regular structures. When crack shape, size, or edge information 
deviates from the norm, the predefined rules may fail.
Recent research trends in crack detection have shifted towards 
data-driven models, which primarily rely on deep learning techniques 
to automatically learn segmentation rules from large-scale annotated 
datasets. Data-driven methods demonstrate high adaptability when 
handling highly complex and diverse image scenarios [3].
Fully convolutional network (FCN) [36], as one of the earliest 
end-to-end semantic segmentation models, convert all layers in the 
classification task into a fully convolutional architecture, enabling the 
processing of input images of arbitrary size and achieving pixel-level 
segmentation. This approach has shown outstanding performance in 
segmentation tasks across natural scenes and medical imaging, lay­
ing the foundation for subsequent research in semantic segmentation. 
Building on the success of FCN, many researchers quickly applied 
it to crack segmentation tasks [37–39], marking the first time the 
reliance on manually designed operators was eliminated. UNet, pro­
posed by Ronneberger et al. for medical imaging, is one of the most 
widely used semantic segmentation model [40]. Its defining feature 
is a symmetric encoder–decoder structure, combining convolution and 
upsampling operations. UNet introduces skip connections for the first 
time, which transfer features from the encoder directly to correspond­
ing layers in the decoder, aiding in better recovery of details. The 
model’s sensitivity to fine details is particularly beneficial for crack 
segmentation tasks, as the skip connections effectively preserve spatial 
information lost during encoding, allowing for more precise recon­
struction of crack morphology and edges during decoding [41–43]. 
The DeepLab series models introduced innovative techniques such as 
dilated convolution and atrous spatial pyramid pooling (ASPP), signif­
icantly improving the precision of multi-scale feature extraction and 
edge detection in semantic segmentation tasks [44,45]. These features 
offer notable advantages in crack segmentation tasks [46–48]. Crack 
segmentation not only requires accurately identifying the thin, curved 
edges of cracks but also capturing the overall morphology across differ­
ent scales. Dilated convolution in DeepLab expands the receptive field 
without increasing computational costs, effectively extracting multi-
scale crack features, while the ASPP module enhances the model’s 
ability to detect cracks in complex background by fusing informa­
tion from multiple scales. HRNet enhances the ability to capture fine 
details in segmentation tasks through its unique architecture, which 
maintains high-resolution feature representations throughout the net­
work and continuously fuses features across different resolutions [49]. 
The model’s sustained focus on high-resolution information is par­
ticularly important for crack segmentation [50]. Cracks often exhibit 
thin, irregular shapes, and their edges are easily obscured by complex 
backgrounds. Building on HRNet, many studies developed models that 
can precisely capture crack edges and morphology without sacrificing
detail [51–53].
Through the above literature review, it is evident that the success of 
precise crack detection models largely depends on the accurate capture 
of both crack structural features and subtle details. The key to achieving 
this lies in the model’s ability to process multi-scale features while main­
taining a clear representation of fine details, addressing the complexity 
of crack morphology and the interference from background noise. To this 
end, the ECFormer model proposed in this paper adopts a dual-branch 
structure, ensuring the effective integration of global information while 
delivering high-resolution detail representation.
2.2 . Transformer in crack segmentation
The Transformer model achieved groundbreaking progress in natural 
language processing based on its self-attention mechanism [9]. Unlike 
traditional sequential models, the Transformer captures long-range de­
pendencies through self-attention while significantly improving mod­
eling efficiency through parallel computation. In recent years, the ViT 
introduced the self-attention mechanism to computer vision, proposing 
to divide input images into fixed-size patches and process them as se­
quential data [10]. ViT’s exceptional performance on large-scale datasets 
has demonstrated the potential of the self-attention mechanism in visual 
tasks, particularly in capturing global context and long-range feature de­
pendencies, offering a notable advantage over CNNs in learning global 
features.
As Transformer models rapidly advance in vision, researchers be­
gun exploring their potential applications in crack segmentation tasks. 
Drawing from the successful experiences of CNNs in crack segmentation, 
an increasing number of studies attempted to combine the self-attention 
mechanism with general CNN models to enhance the original model’s 
ability to capture global features. For instance, several works integrated 
Applied Soft Computing 189 (2026) 114513 
3 

=== Page 4 ===
Y. Li, Z. Ma and R. Ma
the self-attention mechanism into the UNet architecture [54–57], en­
abling simultaneous capture of crack details and global features through 
the fusion of skip connections and self-attention modules. Similarly, vari­
ants of HRNet [58,59] and DeepLab [60] leveraged the self-attention 
mechanism to improve performance in crack segmentation tasks, par­
ticularly in handling complex backgrounds and multi-scale crack struc­
tures. The above studies improved crack segmentation performance by 
introducing the self-attention mechanism, but most rely on the original 
softmax self-attention, which has quadratic computational complexity 
with respect to the input sequence length. As a result, while the addi­
tion of attention modules enhances the model’s ability to capture global 
features, it also significantly increases the computational overhead, 
making the models heavier, especially when processing high-resolution 
images [61].
2.3 . Efficient self-attention mechanism
Early improvements to the self-attention mechanism primarily fo­
cused on restricting the attention field to fixed, predefined patterns, 
such as local windows [62] and block patterns with fixed strides [63], 
thereby sparsifying the attention matrix. In contrast to fixed, prede­
fined patterns, an extended approach involves using learnable patterns 
[64,65]. These learnable and efficient self-attention mechanisms dynam­
ically adjust attention allocation in a data-driven manner, eliminating 
the reliance on fixed patterns. The model autonomously learns token 
correlations and assigns them dynamically to different buckets or clus­
ters, optimizing both the flexibility and adaptability of the attention 
mechanism while reducing computational complexity. Low-rank meth­
ods and kernel methods are two major techniques developed in recent 
years to improve the efficiency of the self-attention mechanism. Low-
rank methods aim to reduce computation and memory usage by applying 
low-rank approximations to the self-attention matrix. The core idea is 
to assume that the 𝑁× 𝑁 attention matrix has a low-rank structure, 
allowing it to be simplified through dimensionality reduction into an 
𝑁× 𝑘 matrix, where 𝑘 is smaller than 𝑁. Linformer is a representative 
of low-rank methods, achieving a significant reduction in computational 
complexity by projecting the length dimension of the Key and Value 
into a lower-dimensional representation space [66]. Kernel methods, 
on the other hand, improve efficiency by reformulating the attention 
mechanism as kernel function operations. By avoiding the explicit com­
putation of the attention matrix, kernel methods transform attention 
computation into more efficient mathematical operations. Since ker­
nel functions provide an approximation of the attention matrix, kernel 
methods can also be considered a variant of low-rank approaches. 
Relevant works include Performers [67] and Linear Transformers [68]. 
Another intuitive approach is to reduce the resolution of the input se­
quence, thereby proportionally decreasing the computational overhead. 
For example, Perceiver selects a small subset of Query from the input 
data to represent the entire sequence [69], while Funnel Transformer 
progressively reduces the sequence length layer by layer, following a 
pyramid-like structure, which gradually lessens the computational costs 
at each layer [70].
3 . Preliminaries
3.1 . Self-attention mechanism
Self-attention operates by calculating a set of attention weights for 
each element in the input sequence, representing the relative importance 
of other elements in relation to the current element [9]. In this way, 
self-attention enables the model to dynamically adjust its focus based 
on context, capturing long-range dependencies that traditional methods, 
such as convolutional or recurrent layers, may overlook. The workflow 
of the self-attention mechanism involves the following steps:
1. Projection of Query, Key, and Value. For each element 𝑥𝑖 in the 
input sequence 𝑋∈R𝑁×𝑑in, linear transformations are applied to 
project it into a query vector 𝑄𝑖, a key vector 𝐾𝑖, a value vector 
𝑉𝑖. The process is formulated as:
𝑄𝑖= 𝑊𝑄⋅𝑥𝑖,
𝐾𝑖= 𝑊𝐾⋅𝑥𝑖,
𝑉𝑖= 𝑊𝑉⋅𝑥𝑖
(1)
where 𝑊𝑄, 𝑊𝐾 and 𝑊𝑉 are learnable projection matrices for 
Query, Key and Value, respectively.
2. Computation of attention weights. Each 𝑄𝑖 is multiplied by all 𝐾𝑖
using dot product to compute the attention weights, which are 
then normalized through the softmax function. The formula is as 
follows:
𝑎𝑖𝑗=
exp (𝑄𝑖⋅𝐾𝑗
)
∑𝑁
𝑗=1 exp (𝑄𝑖⋅𝐾𝑗
)
(2)
3. Weighted sum. The final output is obtained by performing a 
weighted sum of the value vectors 𝑉𝑗, where the weights are the 
computed attention weights 𝑎𝑖𝑗. The formula for calculating the 
output 𝑂𝑖 is:
𝑂𝑖=
𝑁
∑
𝑗=1
𝑎𝑖𝑗⋅𝑉𝑗
(3)
The weighted summation enables the model to emphasize the 
most important parts of the input sequence relative to the current 
element 𝑥𝑖, which is the essence of self-attention.
When calculating the attention weights, each 𝑄𝑖 must perform a dot 
product operation with all 𝐾𝑗, resulting in a computational complexity 
of O(𝑁2), where 𝑁 represents the length of the input sequence.
3.2 . Self-attention in vision
The ViT is a representative model of self-attention in vision [10]. Its 
core idea is to divide the input image into fixed-size patches and treat 
these patches as sequence elements, then apply the attention mechanism 
to capture global features of the image.
1. Patch embedding. First, the input image 𝑋∈R𝐻×𝑊×𝐶 is divided 
into 𝑁 non-overlapping patches, each of size 𝑃× 𝑃. The patches 
are flattened into vectors 𝑥𝑖∈R𝑃2⋅𝐶. Then, each patch is pro­
jected into another space through a linear projection, yielding the 
following embedding representation:
𝑧𝑖= 𝐸⋅𝑥𝑖+ 𝑒pos
(4)
Where, 𝐸∈R𝐷×𝑃2⋅𝐶 is the projection matrix, and 𝑒pos represents 
the positional embedding, which retains the spatial informa­
tion of the patches within the original image. The sequence of 
embeddings is then represented as 𝑍= [𝑧1, 𝑧2, … , 𝑧𝑁].
2. ViT Block. In ViT, the input sequence 𝑍 is processed through mul­
tiple Transformer blocks. Each ViT block consists of Multi-head 
Self-Attention (MSA) and Layer Normalization (LN) and a Feed-
Forward Network (FFN). The computation flow for each block can 
be expressed as:
𝑍′ = MSA(LN(𝑍)) + 𝑍
𝑍′′ = FFN(LN(𝑍′)) + 𝑍′
(5)
In the first step, the input sequence 𝑍 is passed through LN and 
then fed into MSA. The output is then added back to the original 
input 𝑍 via a residual connection. In the second step, the interme­
diate result 𝑍′ is again normalized and passed through the FFN, 
where non-linear transformations are applied. The result is then 
added back to 𝑍′ through another residual connection, yielding 
the final output 𝑍′′.
Applied Soft Computing 189 (2026) 114513 
4 

=== Page 5 ===
Y. Li, Z. Ma and R. Ma
Fig. 2. Overall architecture of ECFormer.
Fig. 3. ECFormer block.
4 . Methodology
In this section, we describe the overall model architecture, followed 
by a detailed introduction to its three key components: Multi-Scale 
Spatial-Reduction Attention (MSSRA), Enhanced ReLU-based Linear 
Attention (ERLA), and Bidirectional Cross-Resolution Feature Enhancer 
(BDCRFE).
4.1 . Overall architecture
Fig. 2 illustrates the overall structure of ECFormer, a five-stage model 
that integrates several key components to ensure efficient and accu­
rate crack segmentation. The first stage is the input stem, consisting 
of standard convolution, batch normalization (BN), and ReLU, which 
reduces the spatial resolution of the input image by half while expand­
ing the channel dimension to 𝐶1. In the second stage, the resolution 
is further reduced to 1∕4 of the original image by the MBConv blocks 
[71], while the channel dimension increases to 𝐶2. The use of MBConv 
is intended to reduce computational costs. The third to fifth stages form 
the core of the model, consisting of ECFormer blocks, which serve as 
the backbone of the entire architecture. Each ECFormer block contains 
two branches, a high-resolution (HR) branch and a low-resolution (LR) 
branch. The design of resolution variation reflects the different func­
tions of these two branches. The HR branch maintains a fixed resolution 
of 𝐻∕4 × 𝑊∕4 throughout the model to ensure that critical detail infor­
mation is preserved during feature extraction, thereby enhancing the 
model’s ability to find small cracks. In contrast, the LR branch fol­
lows a stepwise downsampling strategy, with the resolution decreasing 
from 𝐻∕8 × 𝑊∕8 in the third stage to 𝐻∕16 × 𝑊∕16 in the fourth 
stage, and finally to 𝐻∕32 × 𝑊∕32 in the fifth stage. The progressive
reduction in resolution allows the model to extract high-level semantic 
features while maintaining an effective understanding of global crack
structures.
The HR and LR branches work in parallel, with their outputs 
fused at each stage to achieve a rich multi-scale representation. The 
dual-branch structure effectively preserves multi-scale learning and 
high-resolution representation, which are critical for accurate crack
segmentation.
4.2 . ECFormer block
The ECFormer blocks form the core of the proposed model, featuring 
not only an efficient dual-branch design but also three crafted modules: 
MSSRA, ERLA, and BDCRFE, as shown in Fig. 3.
4.2.1 . Multi-scale spatial-reduction attention
The original MSA [9] takes an input 𝑋∈R𝑁×𝑑in, and then ap­
plies a linear projection layer to transform the input 𝑋 into 𝑄, 𝐾, 𝑉∈
R𝑁×𝑑. The self-attention then takes 𝑄, 𝐾, and 𝑉 as inputs and out­
puts new middle features. As analyzed in Section 3.1, the primary 
issue with the self-attention in terms of efficiency is that its computa­
tional complexity relative to the input sequence is O(𝑁2). Wang et al. 
[72,73] proposed spatial-reduction attention (SRA) to improve the ef­
ficiency of the original self-attention. They introduced an additional 
spatial-reduction module between the linear projection layer and the 
MSA, as shown in Fig. 4(b). Specifically, the spatial reduction mod­
ule first performs downsampling on the spatial dimension of 𝐾 and 𝑉, 
transforming the high-resolution feature map into a low-resolution. The 
low-resolution feature map is then processed by the MSA block. Let the 
downsampling factor be 𝑟, and the sequence length of the input after 
Applied Soft Computing 189 (2026) 114513 
5 

=== Page 6 ===
Y. Li, Z. Ma and R. Ma
Fig. 4. Comparison of original self-attention, spatial-reduction attention, multi-scale spatial-reduction attention.
downsampling is 𝑁∕𝑟. Therefore, the computational complexity of SRA 
is O((𝑁∕𝑟)2 × 𝑑), which can be simplified to O((𝑁2 × 𝑑)∕𝑟2). Since 𝑟 is 
usually greater than 1, which means that the computational complexity 
of SRA is significantly lower than that of the original self-attention. For 
the input 𝑋, SRA can be expressed as:
SRA(𝑋) = MSA(𝑄, SR(𝐾), SR(𝑉))
(6)
There are typically two methods for spatial reduction: one is convolu­
tion with a stride greater than 1, and the other is pooling. Since pooling 
has significantly lower complexity than convolution and does not in­
volve learnable parameters, this study adopts adaptive average pooling 
following PVTv2 [73].
SRA reduces computational complexity compared to the original self-
attention but limits the model’s capacity. Since the spatial-reduction 
module downsamples 𝐾 and 𝑉 to a fixed spatial resolution, the 𝑄 can 
only retrieve features at a fixed scale. For example, in PVTv2 [73], the 
authors fixed the reduced spatial resolution to 7×7. To enhance the abil­
ity to learn multi-scale spatial features, our paper proposes a multi-scale 
pooling to capture features at different scales, referred to as multi-scale 
spatial-reduction attention, as shown in Fig. 4(c). Unlike window-based 
approaches such as Swin Transformer [62], which restrict attention to 
local regions, MSSRA maintains a global receptive field while capturing 
features at multiple scales. This is particularly advantageous for seg­
menting cracks, which often exhibit long-range, continuous structures 
that would span across local windows.
MSSRA includes four different global adaptive average pooling sizes, 
specifically 1, 3, 5, and 7. In the implementation, after linear projection, 
𝑄, 𝐾, and 𝑉 are divided into four parts along the channel dimension, 
following the multi-head setting of the original self-attention. In this 
work, the number of heads is kept at four. Spatial pooling is applied to 
𝐾 and 𝑉 in each head, resulting in four new sets of 𝐾 and 𝑉 at different 
scales. Self-attention is then performed on the feature maps at different 
scales, producing multi-scale outputs. Finally, the multi-scale features 
are concatenated along the channel dimension. The proposed MSSRA 
can be expressed as:
MSSRA = Linear(Concat(Head1, … , Head𝑛))
Head𝑖= Attention(𝑄𝑖, SR(𝐾𝑖), SR(𝑉𝑖))
(7)
where 𝑖 represents different attention heads, which are set to 4 in this 
work. Each head performs adaptive global average pooling with one of 
the sizes from 1, 3, 5, and 7, meaning that each head extracts spatial 
features at a fixed scale.
The reduction in computational complexity brought by MSSRA is 
particularly beneficial for handling high-resolution features, which typ­
ically have very long sequences. Directly applying the self-attention 
would result in significant computational and memory overhead. By 
introducing the multi-scale spatial-reduction module, the demand for 
computational resources can be greatly reduced while maintaining a 
certain level of feature representation capability. Specifically, given in­
put features of size 𝐻× 𝑊× 𝐶, the computational costs of MSA, SRA, 
and MSSRA can be expressed as:
Ω(MSA) = 2(𝐻𝑊)2𝐶
Ω(SRA) = 2𝐻𝑊𝑝2𝐶
Ω(MSSRA) =
4
∑
𝑖=1
2𝐻𝑊𝑝2
𝑖
𝐶
4
= 1
2
4
∑
𝑖=1
𝐻𝑊𝑝2
𝑖𝐶
(8)
Here, 𝑝 represents the size of the adaptive pooling. When 𝑝 is set to 
7, the computational complexity of the proposed MSSRA is only half 
that of the original SRA [73]. Given its efficiency on high-resolution 
features, this study applies the proposed MSSRA to the HR branch of
ECFormer.
4.2.2 . Enhanced ReLU-based linear attention
In crack segmentation, capturing global information is crucial for 
improving model performance. Although the original self-attention pro­
vides a global receptive field, it comes with high computational complex­
ity. To address this issue, this work adopts a ReLU-based linear attention 
(RLA) [68].
Given input 𝑋∈R𝑁×𝑑in, the general form of self-attention can be 
represented as: 
𝐴𝑖=
𝑁
∑
𝑗=1
Sim (𝑄𝑖, 𝐾𝑗
) 𝑉𝑗
∑𝑁
𝑗=1 Sim (𝑄𝑖, 𝐾𝑗
)
(9)
Where 𝑄= 𝑋𝑊𝑄, 𝐾= 𝑋𝑊𝐾, 𝑉= 𝑋𝑊𝑉, and 𝑊𝑄, 𝑊𝐾, 𝑊𝑉∈R𝑑in×𝑑
are the learnable linear projection matrices. 𝐴𝑖 indicates the i-th row of 
attention matrix 𝐴. Sim(⋅, ⋅) denotes a function that calculates the sim­
ilarity between two vectors. In the original self-attention [9] and ViT 
[10], the commonly employed method is scaled dot-product attention 
with softmax, where the similarity metric function Sim(.,.) is:
Sim(𝑄, 𝐾) = exp
(𝑄𝐾T
√
𝑑
)
(10)
where the attention matrix is obtained by calculating the similarity be­
tween all 𝑄 and 𝐾, leading to a computational complexity of O(𝑁2). 
Apart from the similarity metric function in Eq. (10), Angelos et al. [68] 
proposed linear attention as an alternative to softmax attention, which 
is generally represented as: 
Sim(𝑄, 𝐾) = 𝜙(𝑄)𝜙(𝐾)𝑇
(11)
where, 𝜙() is a kernel function. Based on Eq. (11), Eq. (9) can be 
rewritten as: 
Applied Soft Computing 189 (2026) 114513 
6 

=== Page 7 ===
Y. Li, Z. Ma and R. Ma
Fig. 5. Computational flow of different attention.
𝐴𝑖=
𝑁
∑
𝑗=1
𝜙(𝑄𝑖
) 𝜙(𝐾𝑗
)T𝑉𝑗
∑𝑁
𝑗=1 𝜙(𝑄𝑖
) 𝜙(𝐾𝑗
)T
=
∑𝑁
𝑗=1
(𝜙(𝑄𝑖)𝜙(𝐾𝑗)T) 𝑉𝑗
𝜙(𝑄𝑖) ∑𝑁
𝑗=1 𝜙(𝐾𝑗)T
(12)
According to the associative property of matrix multiplication, Eq. (12) 
can be further optimized as:
𝐴𝑖=
∑𝑁
𝑗=1
[
𝜙(𝑄𝑖
) 𝜙(𝐾𝑗
)T]
𝑉𝑗
𝜙(𝑄𝑖
) ∑𝑁
𝑗=1 𝜙(𝐾𝑗
)T
=
∑𝑁
𝑗=1 𝜙(𝑄𝑖
) [(
𝜙(𝐾𝑗
)T𝑉𝑗
)]
𝜙(𝑄𝑖
) ∑𝑁
𝑗=1 𝜙(𝐾𝑗
)T
=
𝜙(𝑄𝑖
) (∑𝑁
𝑗=1 𝜙(𝐾𝑗
)T𝑉𝑗
)
𝜙(𝑄𝑖
) (∑𝑁
𝑗=1 𝜙(𝐾𝑗
)T)
(13)
It can be observed that when calculating the attention matrix A, it is only 
necessary to compute ∑𝑁
𝑗=1 𝜙(𝐾𝑗)T𝑉𝑗 and ∑𝑁
𝑗=1 𝜙(𝐾𝑗)T once, which can 
then be reused for each 𝑄. Therefore, the computational complexity is 
O(𝑁), meaning linear complexity. Researchers in EfficientViT employed 
ReLU as the kernel function and demonstrated its effectiveness in the 
visual domain [61]. Fig. 5 presents a comparison of the computational 
flow between softmax attention and ReLU-based linear attention.
Compared to the original softmax attention [9,10], ReLU-based 
linear attention [68] offers significant advantages in terms of compu­
tational complexity and hardware efficiency. However, it still has some 
drawbacks. Specifically, softmax possesses a non-linear normalization 
property, where all input vectors are normalized into a probability distri­
bution within the range [0,1]. Additionally, since the sum of all elements 
equals 1, which ensures a competitive relationship among the elements, 
making the attention map more focused and thus better at capturing 
more relevant information. In contrast, the ReLU function truncates neg­
ative values in the input vectors to 0, resulting in sparse feature maps. 
Due to the lack of normalization and non-linear competition, the fea­
ture maps generated by ReLU tend to be smoother, making it harder to 
highlight important attention regions and less effective at capturing key 
features compared to softmax attention. Based on the above analysis, 
this work proposes an enhancement to ReLU-based linear attention by 
applying an exponential function mapping to the input tensor. By ad­
justing the direction of each 𝑄 and 𝐾, it brings closer the 𝑄∕𝐾 pairs 
that are more similar and pushes apart those that are less similar. The 
proposed new similarity metric function: 
Sim (𝑄𝑖, 𝐾𝑗
) = 𝜙𝑝
(𝑄𝑖
) 𝜙𝑝
(𝐾𝑗
)T
(14)
Where, 
𝜙𝑝(𝑥) = 𝑓𝑝(ReLU(𝑥))
𝑓𝑝(𝑥) =
∥𝑥∥
‖𝑒𝑥−1‖ (𝑒𝑥−1)
(15)
To provide a more intuitive understanding, an example is given here 
to demonstrate the effect of the mapping function 𝑓𝑝, as shown in Fig. 6. 
It can be directly observed that the norm of the feature vectors remains 
unchanged before and after the 𝑓𝑝 mapping, while only the direction 
changes. At the same time, features that are close to each other are 
drawn closer, whereas those that are farther apart become more dis­
tant. This ensures that the distribution of the feature matrix becomes 
sharper, allowing the model to focus on the most important features. 
While other linear attention methods like Performer [67] achieve effi­
ciency by approximating the softmax function with feature kernels, the 
unique contribution of ERLA is this explicit feature sharpening via the 
𝑓𝑝 function.
The LR branch has the ability to learn global semantic features
[50,74], while the global receptive field can capture the overall struc­
ture of the image and long-range dependencies [44]. The proposed ERLA 
module achieves a global receptive field with only linear complexity. 
Therefore, this paper applies the module to the LR branch.
4.2.3 . Bidirectional cross-resolution feature enhancer
In most dual-branch or multi-branch models [49,50,74], the feature 
fusion from different branches is often based on element-wise multipli­
cation or addition, which are highly efficient methods. However, such 
simple fusion techniques may not fully capture the complex relation­
ships between different branches. To better utilize the features extracted 
by each branch, several recent works have proposed more complex 
fusion methods. For instance, attention-based fusion methods dynami­
cally assign weights to different features, allowing for a better emphasis 
on key features and the suppression of irrelevant information [75,76]. 
Attention-based feature enhancement methods are particularly advan­
tageous in vision-language multi-modal tasks [77,78], as these models 
need to handle different types of features. Cross-attention can facilitate 
interactive modeling between different modalities, capturing correla­
tions across modalities and improving performance [9]. The motivation 
for the proposed BDCRFE in this work stems from this idea, leverag­
ing the well-established cross-attention mechanism that has been proven 
effective in multi-modal learning and multi-scale vision transformers.
Specifically, the proposed method considers the HR and LR branches 
as two different modalities and uses bidirectional cross-resolution cross-
attention to enhance feature fusion. The work most similar to the 
Applied Soft Computing 189 (2026) 114513 
7 

=== Page 8 ===
Y. Li, Z. Ma and R. Ma
Fig. 6. Mapping function 𝑓𝑝 on 𝑄∕𝐾.
Fig. 7. Bidirectional cross-resolution feature enhancer.
proposed method is CrossViT [75], where the authors divide the same 
image into two groups of patches with different sizes and apply self-
attention within each group before using cross-attention to fuse features. 
However, the design of CrossViT is aimed at image classification, and the 
authors only used the CLS token as a Query during the cross-attention 
fusion stage to exchange information between the two branches. While 
this design is sufficient for image classification, it is inadequate for dense 
prediction tasks.
The BDCRFE proposed in this work is more generalized, fully ex­
changing features from both branches. Additionally, through stacking 
multiple ECFormer modules, the proposed feature enhancer endows 
the model with multi-scale learning capabilities on a global level. 
Specifically, in the three ECFormer blocks, the scale of the HR branch 
remains constant, while the spatial resolution of the LR branch pro­
gressively decreases, ensuring that the HR branch can learn features of 
different scales from the LR branch.
Fig. 7 illustrates the proposed BDCRFE. The HR features are derived 
from the previous MSSRA module, while the LR features come from the 
preceding ERLA module. To establish an effective connection between 
the HR and LR features, the BDCRFE module achieves feature fusion in 
two steps. First, the proposed method utilizes high-to-low cross atten­
tion (H2LCA), where the HR features are used as the Query, and the LR 
Algorithm 1 Bidirectional cross-resolution feature enhancer.
1: Input: High-res feature 𝐹HR, Low-res feature 𝐹LR
2: Output: Enhanced features 𝐹′
HR, 𝐹′
LR
3: #— High-to-Low Cross-Attention (H2LCA) —
4: 𝑄HR ←𝐹HR
5: 𝐾LR, 𝑉LR ←𝐹LR, 𝐹LR
6: 𝐾′
LR ←ConvLR→HR
1×1
(𝐾LR)
⊳ Align K channels to HR
7: 𝑉′
LR ←ConvLR→HR
1×1
(𝑉LR)
⊳ Align V channels to HR
8: 𝐹′
HR ←MSSRA(𝑄HR, 𝐾′
LR, 𝑉′
LR) + 𝐹HR
⊳ Residual connection
9: #— Low-to-High Cross-Attention (L2HCA) —
10: 𝑄LR ←𝐹LR
11: 𝐾HR, 𝑉HR ←𝐹HR, 𝐹HR
12: 𝐾′
HR ←ConvHR→LR
1×1
(𝐾HR)
⊳ Align K channels to LR
13: 𝑉′
HR ←ConvHR→LR
1×1
(𝑉HR)
⊳ Align V channels to LR
14: 𝐹′
LR ←ERLA(𝑄LR, 𝐾′
HR, 𝑉′
HR) + 𝐹LR
⊳ Residual connection
15: return 𝐹′
HR, 𝐹′
LR
features serve as the Key and Value, facilitating feature interaction and 
fusion. This design builds connections between features of different reso­
lutions, allowing the HR features to capture the global information from 
the LR features, thereby enhancing the HR representational capacity. 
Next, through low-to-high cross-attention (L2HCA), the LR features are 
used as the Query, and the HR features as the Key and Value, perform­
ing feature interaction and fusion once again. This step complements the 
previous H2LCA, enabling the LR features to absorb detailed information 
from the HR branch.
Notably, for the bidirectional cross-attention in Fig. 7, the channel 
numbers of the Key and Value differ from those of the Query, so a 1 × 1
convolution is used to align the channel dimensions. Additionally, the 
MSSRA and ERLA proposed in the Sections 4.2.1 and 4.2.2 are used to 
replace the original cross-attention in H2LCA and L2HCA, and a detailed 
comparison is provided in the ablation analysis. The detailed steps of the 
BDCRFE are presented in Algorithm 1.
4.3 . Model instantiation
Following HRNet [49] and HRSegNet [50], the channel dimension 
in the HR branch of ECFormer is fixed at a constant value. In this study, 
three variants of ECFormer, namely ECFormer-B16, ECFormer-B32, and 
ECFormer-B48, are employed for experiments, where 16, 32, and 48 
represent the channel dimensions of the HR branch.
Table 1 provides details of the ECFormer configuration. ECFormer 
consists of two branches, where the HR branch remains throughout the 
entire model, while the LR branch only exists within the ECFormer block. 
Applied Soft Computing 189 (2026) 114513 
8 

=== Page 9 ===
Y. Li, Z. Ma and R. Ma
Table 1 
Detailed configuration of ECFormer. 𝑠 denotes convolution stride, 
𝑡 represents the intermediate expansion rate of MBConv, 𝑝 refers to 
the maximum adaptive pooling size of MSSRA, and ℎ indicates the 
number of heads for all self-attention.
Stage
Module
HR Branch
LR Branch
1
Input Stem
Conv-BN-ReLU, 𝑠= 1
–
Conv-BN-ReLU, 𝑠= 2
2
MBConv
MBConv, 𝑠= 1, 𝑡= 4
–
MBConv, 𝑠= 2, 𝑡= 4
3
ECFormer Block
MSSRA, 𝑝= 7, ℎ= 4
ERLA, ℎ= 4
BDCRFE, ℎ= 4
BDCRFE, ℎ= 4
4
ECFormer Block
MSSRA, 𝑝= 7, ℎ= 4
ERLA, ℎ= 4
BDCRFE, ℎ= 4
BDCRFE, ℎ= 4
5
ECFormer Block
MSSRA, 𝑝= 7, ℎ= 4
ERLA, ℎ= 4
BDCRFE, ℎ= 4
BDCRFE, ℎ= 4
Table 2 
Details of datasets.
Dataset
Size
Training Set
Validation Set
Test Set
CrackSeg9k
400 × 400
6951
900
900
Concrete3k
500 × 500
1800
300
900
Asphalt3k
500 × 500
1800
300
900
The channel dimension of the LR branch doubles as the spatial reso­
lution is halved, following the design of ResNet [79]. For the model’s 
segmentation head, a dual-step segmentation head from HRSegNet is 
used [50].
In recent Transformer-based segmentation models, the FFN has grad­
ually shifted from a two-layer MLP [10] to depth-wise convolution 
[73,76]. This is because convolution has been shown to complement 
positional information and locality, thereby eliminating the need for po­
sitional encoding. This paper follows the design of RTFormer [76], using 
two 3 × 3 depth-wise convolution layers without dimensional expansion 
in the attention modules of MSSRA, ERLA, and BDCRFE. This setup uses 
fewer parameters.
5 . Experiments
5.1 . Datasets and evaluation metrics
In this study, three datasets, CrackSeg9k [80], Concrete3k [50], and 
Asphalt3k [50] are used to validate the proposed model. CrackSeg9k 
is currently a relatively large publicly available evaluation benchmark 
in the field of crack segmentation, which incorporates ten public crack 
datasets containing four different materials, namely asphalt, concrete, 
masonry, and ceramic. CrackSeg9k contains a total of 8751 images with 
a resolution of 400 × 400 and their corresponding labels, which are as­
signed to the categories of crack and background. It should be noted that 
since the original dataset suffers from data and label mismatches, the 
version in the literature HrSegNet [50] is used in this work. This paper 
randomly selects 900 images as the validation and test sets, respectively, 
and the rest are used as the training set. Concrete3k and Asphalt3k are 
scenario-specific crack datasets focusing on the task of detecting cracks 
in concrete and asphalt structures respectively, and both of them have 
a resolution of 500 × 500. Both datasets are divided into training, valida­
tion, and test sets according to the ratio of 6:1:3. The details of the three 
datasets are in Table 2 and some samples are shown in Fig. 8.
Four metrics are used in this work to evaluate the segmentation per­
formance of all models, Precision (Pr), Recall (Re), F1-score and mean 
Intersection over Union (mIoU). These metrics are defined as follows: 
Pr =
𝑇𝑃
𝑇𝑃+ 𝐹𝑃
(16)
Re =
𝑇𝑃
𝑇𝑃+ 𝐹𝑁
(17)
F1 = 2 × Pr × Re
Pr + Re
(18)
IoU =
𝑇𝑃
𝑇𝑃+ 𝐹𝑃+ 𝐹𝑁
(19)
mIoU = 1
𝑁
𝑁
∑
𝑖=1
IoU𝑖
(20)
Where True Positive (TP) means that crack pixels are correctly classi­
fied, False Positive (FP) means that background pixels are incorrectly 
classified as cracks, and False Negative (FN) means that crack pixels are 
incorrectly recognized as background.
In addition, Frames Per Second (FPS) is used to evaluate the inference 
speed, and Giga Floating-Point Operations (GFLOPs) and Parameters 
(Params) are used as metrics to evaluate the computational complexity 
and the model size.
5.2 . Implementation details
The proposed ECFormer instances are implemented using PyTorch 
[81], with all training, evaluation, and testing conducted within the 
MMSegmentation framework [82]. During training, data augmenta­
tion including random resizing, random horizontal flipping, random 
cropping, and random photometric distortion are applied. The random 
resizing scale ranges from 0.5 to 2.0, with a crop size of 400 × 400 for 
CrackSeg9k, and 500 × 500 for both Concrete3k and Asphalt3k. The 
ECFormer instances are trained using the AdamW [83], with 100,000 
iterations on CrackSeg9k and 20,000 iterations on Concrete3k and 
Asphalt3k. Notably, for the ablation studies on CrackSeg9k, the random 
crop size is 200 × 200, with 20,000 iterations per experiment to quickly 
validate the impact of each module on model performance. The initial 
learning rate is set to 0.00006, with a default polynomial learning rate 
scheduler using a factor of 1.0, and weight decay set to 0.01. All training 
experiments for ECFormer, including the measurements for training time 
and GPU memory, are conducted on a single NVIDIA RTX 4090 with a 
batch size of 16. The inference-speed evaluations are performed on an 
RTX 4060 with a batch size of 1. All models use a binary cross-entropy 
loss.
5.3 . Comparative study and results
In evaluating ECFormer models, their performance is compared with 
commonly used and state-of-the-art deep learning methods. The com­
parison models are broadly divided into two categories: CNN-based 
and Transformer-based models. The CNN models include FCN [36], 
UNet [40], BiSeNetV2 [84], OCRNet [85], and DMA-Net [47], while 
the Transformer-based models are SegFormer [86], RTFormer [76], 
CrackFormer [54], CT [87], and SegCrack [88]. Among them, DMA-
Net, CrackFormer, CT, and SegCrack represent leading models in crack 
segmentation since 2022. Table 3 presents the quantitative evaluation 
results of all models on CrackSeg9k.
5.3.1 . Quantitative analysis
Results from Table 3 indicate that ECFormer excels across multi­
ple key performance metrics. Specifically, ECFormer-B48 leads with 
the highest mIoU at 81.85 %, indicating it provides the most accu­
rate segmentation results compared to all other models. Additionally, 
ECFormer-B48 exhibits exceptional performance in Pr and Re, with 
scores of 89.04 % and 87.54 % respectively, and an F1 score of 88.28 %. 
Compared to CNN-based models like FCN, UNet, and DMA-Net, the 
ECFormer series show a clear advantage. Although OCRNet achieves 
an mIoU of 80.90 %, ranking second to ECFormer-B48, its parameters 
(12.11 M) and computational complexity (32.40 GFLOPs) are signifi­
cantly higher than those of ECFormer-B48 (6.08 M and 6.54 GFLOPs), 
indicating that ECFormer maintains high performance while being more 
computationally and parameter efficient. Among Transformer-based 
models, ECFormer variants also demonstrate significant superiority. 
For instance, SegFormer’s mIoU of 78.80 % is considerably lower 
Applied Soft Computing 189 (2026) 114513 
9 

=== Page 10 ===
Y. Li, Z. Ma and R. Ma
Fig. 8. Samples of CrackSeg9k, Concrete3k, Asphalt3k.
Table 3 
Quantitative evaluation on CrackSeg9k.
Model
mIoU (%)
Pr (%)
Re (%)
F1 (%)
FPS
Params (M)
GFLOPs
Memory(GB)
Train Time(h)
FCN (MobileNetV2)
77.84
87.22
81.25
84.13
66.2
9.80
29.60
6.3
6.1
UNet
79.15
89.82
84.75
87.21
45.7
13.40
75.87
19.4
15.7
BiSeNetV2
75.09
87.07
81.17
84.38
85.3
2.33
4.93
5.8
2.1
OCRNet (HRNet-W18)
80.90
88.26
88.58
88.41
45.2
12.11
32.40
14.6
6.7
DMA-Net (ResNet18)
80.67
88.95
87.23
88.08
58.8
13.80
44.26
10.4
9.2
SegFormer (MiT-B0)
78.80
88.99
83.56
86.19
95.5
3.81
6.65
6.7
2.9
RTFormer-Slim
79.96
89.05
86.34
87.67
75.1
4.80
3.94
5.5
2.3
CrackFormer
80.25
88.04
86.61
87.32
27.9
4.96
59.21
19.6
12.3
CT
79.27
90.21
85.33
87.70
68.2
6.62
17.62
11.9
4.0
SegCrack
79.59
88.10
85.27
86.66
35.5
28.44
42.83
20.5
9.8
ECFormer-B16
80.84
88.74
87.12
87.92
156.2
0.82
0.98
3.6
1.1
ECFormer-B32
81.28
88.91
87.03
87.96
132.3
2.89
2.83
4.9
1.9
ECFormer-B48
81.85
89.04
87.54
88.28
102.9
6.08
6.54
6.1
2.6
than that of ECFormer-B48. Furthermore, although RTFormer-Slim and 
CrackFormer have advantages in terms of parameters, their overall per­
formance still falls short of ECFormer. Particularly, CrackFormer, with 
an mIoU of 80.25 %, remains below ECFormer-B48’s 81.85 %.
Importantly, ECFormer demonstrates a significant advantage in in­
ference speed. ECFormer-B16 achieves an inference speed of 156.2 
FPS, substantially higher than other models. Even with increased pa­
rameters and computational demand, ECFormer-B32 and ECFormer-
B48 maintain high real-time performance, with 132.3 and 102.9 FPS,
respectively.
ECFormer demonstrates excellent scalability through its variants 
B16, B32, and B48, enabling efficient performance across diverse com­
putational resources. A model’s scalability is primarily characterized 
by its consistent performance and efficiency optimization at different 
scales. The B16, B32, and B48 variants represent different configurations 
of channel dimensions in the HR branch. Specifically, ECFormer-B16 has 
the smallest parameters (0.82 M) and computational complexity (0.98 
GFLOPs), while ECFormer-B48 has the largest (6.08 M parameters, 6.54 
GFLOPs). This design allows ECFormer to adapt flexibly to a range of 
computational devices and application scenarios, from low-end to high-
end. Table 3 indicates that despite significant differences in parameters 
and computational complexity, ECFormer variants maintain high consis­
tency in performance metrics. For instance, ECFormer-B16 achieves an 
mIoU of 80.84 %, Pr of 88.74 %, Re of 87.12 %, and F1 score of 87.92 %. 
As model size increases, ECFormer-B32 and ECFormer-B48 show im­
provements in these metrics, with B48 reaching the highest mIoU of 
81.85 %, Pr of 89.04 %, Re of 87.54 %, and F1 score of 88.28 %. The 
observed steady improvement in model performance as scale increases 
demonstrates ECFormer’s scalability advantage.
5.3.2 . Qualitative analysis
Figs. 9 and 10 visually present some results of ECFormer and other 
methods on the CrackSeg9k test set. Overall, Transformer-based models 
outperform some CNN-based models, particularly FCN and BiSeNetV2, 
which consistently produce weaker results compared to Transformer-
based models. This highlights the advantage of Transformer models in 
capturing long-range dependencies and complex structures in crack im­
ages, leading to more accurate segmentation and validating the method 
selection in this work. While OCRNet is also a CNN-based model, its per­
formance surpasses the other four CNN models, largely due to its HRNet 
backbone [49], further supporting the rationale for designing high-
resolution models in our paper. For ECFormer specifically, as the model 
scale increases from B16 to B48, segmentation performance steadily 
improves, demonstrating the stable scalability of the proposed approach.
The qualitative results presented in Figs. 9 and 10 not only highlight 
ECFormer’s superior segmentation accuracy but also provide compelling 
evidence of its robustness across various challenging real-world scenar­
ios. For instance, in the case of thin, evenly distributed cracks (first 
row), Transformer-based models like ECFormer accurately capture these 
fine details, whereas traditional CNN models exhibit significant missed 
detections. For cracks captured from an oblique viewpoint with com­
plex morphology (second row), ECFormer achieves the most accurate 
and complete segmentation compared to the rough results from other 
models. When faced with low-light and low-contrast images (rows three 
and five), ECFormer-B48 successfully identifies the entire crack outline, 
a task where other models, including FCN, UNet, and SegCrack, sub­
stantially fail. Furthermore, for images featuring complex background 
textures and noise (last row), ECFormer demonstrates strong noise re­
silience by accurately segmenting the cracks and avoiding false positives. 
Applied Soft Computing 189 (2026) 114513 
10 

=== Page 11 ===
Y. Li, Z. Ma and R. Ma
Fig. 9. Qualitative results of ECFormer, FCN, UNet, and BiSeNetV2 on CrackSeg9k.
Fig. 10. Qualitative results of OCRNet, DMA-Net, SegFormer, RTFormer, CrackFormer, CT and SegCrack on CrackSeg9k.
In summary, ECFormer excels in diverse and challenging conditions—
from tiny cracks and complex viewpoints to low contrast and noisy 
backgrounds. This consistent outperformance against both CNN and 
other Transformer models validates its superiority and confirms the 
robust design of the proposed architecture for crack segmentation tasks.
5.3.3 . Results in specific scenarios
In practical applications, crack detection tasks typically involve spe­
cific scenarios rather than a comprehensive dataset like CrackSeg9k. 
Therefore, the performance of ECFormer on Concrete3k and Asphalt3k 
is analyzed to assess its effectiveness in specific contexts. Table 4 com­
pares the crack segmentation performance of models that performed 
well on CrackSeg9k with their results on Concrete3k and Asphalt3k, 
while Figs. 11 and 12 provide visual representations.
Table 4 shows that ECFormer performs best on Asphalt3k and 
Concrete3k. On Asphalt3k, ECFormer-B48 achieves the highest mIoU of 
81.29 % and an F1 score of 88.65 %, outperforming all comparison mod­
els. On Concrete3k, ECFormer-B48 leads with an mIoU of 86.36 % and 
an F1 score of 93.83 %, again the highest among the models compared. 
Applied Soft Computing 189 (2026) 114513 
11 

=== Page 12 ===
Y. Li, Z. Ma and R. Ma
Table 4 
Performance comparisons on Asphalt3k and Concrete3k.
Model
Asphalt3k
Concrete3k
mIoU (%)
F1 (%)
mIoU (%)
F1 (%)
UNet
78.52
86.93
84.20
91.05
OCRNet
79.84
87.05
85.61
92.11
DMA-Net
80.23
87.22
84.46
91.37
CrackFormer
80.43
87.63
85.67
92.82
SegCrack
80.32
88.09
85.59
92.66
ECFormer-B48
81.29
88.65
86.36
93.83
In contrast, OCRNet’s performance on Concrete3k, with an mIoU of 
85.61 % and an F1 score of 92.11 %, while commendable, still falls short 
of ECFormer-B48’s performance. Other advanced models specifically 
designed for crack segmentation, such as DMA-Net, CrackFormer, and 
SegCrack, also perform inferiorly to ECFormer-B48 across both datasets.
Fig. 11 displays some visual results of compared models on 
Asphalt3k, including ECFormer-B48, UNet, OCRNet, DMA-Net, 
CrackFormer, and SegCrack. In the first row, which shows global 
asphalt cracks, ECFormer-B48 accurately captures the overall structure 
and details of the cracks, outperforming UNet and DMA-Net, which 
exhibit significant omissions. In the second row, depicting low-contrast 
discontinuous cracks, ECFormer-B48, despite some false detections, 
still surpasses other models. In the third row’s complex scenes with 
tiny cracks, ECFormer-B48 precisely identifies cracks that are diffi­
cult to capture, whereas UNet, CrackFormer, and SegCrack severely 
miss such features. The fourth row, featuring cracks on white lane 
markings, shows ECFormer-B48’s robustness despite some omissions, 
outperforming other models that misidentify features.
Fig. 12 illustrates some visual results on Concrete3k. In the first row, 
images fraught with severe impact noise typically induce false positives 
in compared models; however, ECFormer-B48 demonstrates superior 
performance by accurately delineating cracks without succumbing to 
these errors. The cracks in the second row have different scales, one thick 
and one thin. Here, ECFormer-B48 stands out by successfully detecting 
the finer cracks, an ability that eludes other models, thus showcasing its 
acute sensitivity to minute structural details. In the third row, the fo­
cus shifts to intermittent cracks, which pose significant difficulties. Both 
ECFormer-B48 and OCRNet, leveraging their high-resolution strengths, 
adeptly identify these elusive features, unlike DMA-Net, which largely 
fails in this regard. The fourth row tests the models’ ability to dis­
tinguish between genuine cracks and similar-looking linear patterns. 
While OCRNet, DMA-Net, and SegCrack misclassify these patterns as 
cracks, our proposed method effectively resists such misidentifications, 
highlighting its exceptional specificity and robustness against false 
positives.
Fig. 11. Qualitative results of ECFormer-B48, UNet, OCRNet, DMA-Net, CrackFormer and SegCrack on Asphalt3k.
Fig. 12. Qualitative results of ECFormer-B48, UNet, OCRNet, DMA-Net, CrackFormer and SegCrack on Concrete3k.
Applied Soft Computing 189 (2026) 114513 
12 

=== Page 13 ===
Y. Li, Z. Ma and R. Ma
Table 5 
Robustness on CrackSeg9k (400 × 400). Moderate severity (𝑠=3) mIoU per 
corruption and aggregate robustness score RS.
Model
Clean
Noise
Motion
Brightness
JPEG
RS
OCRNet (HRNet-W18)
80.9
75.2
72.8
77.1
76.0
91.8
DMA-Net (ResNet18)
80.7
74.7
71.2
76.7
75.7
90.9
CrackFormer
80.2
74.5
71.2
76.8
74.8
91.2
SegCrack
79.6
73.6
71.5
75.6
74.1
91.2
ECFormer-B48
81.8
76.8
73.8
78.5
76.6
92.2
Overall, ECFormer exhibits exceptional performance across vari­
ous crack scenarios, precisely capturing the boundaries and shapes 
of tiny cracks, demonstrating its potential and superiority in crack 
segmentation tasks.
5.4 . Robustness to common corruptions
Following the corruption taxonomy and severity design popularized 
by ImageNet-C [89], four common corruptions are adapted to seman­
tic segmentation in the crack domain: Gaussian noise, motion blur, 
brightness (illumination) shift, and JPEG compression. Each corruption 
is evaluated at five severities (𝑠=1–5). Unless stated, tables report the 
moderate level (𝑠=3), and figures present full severity curves. All eval­
uations are conducted on CrackSeg9k with batch= 1, input 400 × 400, 
and no test-time augmentation. Formal operator definitions are provided 
in Appendix A.
Let 𝑚clean denote the mIoU on clean images and 𝑚𝑝,𝑠 the mIoU under 
corruption family 𝑝 at severity 𝑠. The relative drop is defined as 
Δ𝑝,𝑠=
𝑚clean −𝑚𝑝,𝑠
𝑚clean
× 100 %.
(21)
Robustness is summarized by the aggregate score 
RS = 100 −
1
∑
𝑝|𝑆𝑝|
∑
𝑝
∑
𝑠∈𝑆𝑝
Δ𝑝,𝑠,
(22)
where higher RS indicates a smaller average relative drop across families 
and severities.
Severity levels for the four corruptions are listed in Table A.1. All op­
erators act on per-channel normalized images in [0, 1]; formal definitions 
appear in Eqs. (A.1) to (A.4).
ECFormer-B48 achieves the best overall robustness (RS=92.2), 
ahead of OCRNet (91.8) and DMA-Net (90.9) in Table 5. At the moder­
ate level (𝑠=3), ECFormer-B48 consistently tops all four families (Noise 
76.8, Motion 73.8, Brightness 78.5, JPEG 76.6), with margins typi­
cally +0.6–2.0 mIoU over strong CNN and Transformer baselines. The 
sensitivity ordering is stable across models—JPEG and motion blur 
incur the largest losses, whereas brightness is comparatively benign. 
Curves over 𝑠=0–5 in Fig. 13 confirm near-monotonic degradation with 
ECFormer-B48 retaining the leading trajectory up to 𝑠=5.
5.5 . Ablation study
To rigorously evaluate the individual contribution of each proposed 
module (MSSRA, ERLA, and BDCRFE) to the overall performance and 
efficiency gains, we conduct a series of detailed ablation studies in this 
section. The ablation experiments are performed on CrackSeg9k, where 
the model is trained from scratch using Kaiming Normal initialization 
[90]. To evaluate the performance of the proposed modules, convolution 
block with similar parameters is used to replace each proposed atten­
tion module, with the results of this model serving as the baseline for 
comparative experiments. Subsequent comparative models using convo­
lution are referred to as baseline models. For efficient ablation analysis, 
only ECFormer-B16 is used, with image cropping set to 200 × 200 and 
iterations limited to 20,000.
Initially, the convolutional blocks in the baseline are sequentially re­
placed with MSSRA, ERLA, and BDCRFE. It is important to note that 
MSSRA replaces the convolution block only in the HR branch, while 
ERLA is exclusively used in the LR branch. The results are shown 
in Table 6. By substituting the convolution with MSSRA, the model’s 
mIoU increased to 77.60 %, showing an improvement of 0.56 %. 
Although MSSRA introduces additional computational costs, increasing 
Fig. 13. Robustness on CrackSeg9k: mIoU vs. severity (𝑠=0–5) across four corruption families (Gaussian noise, Motion blur, Brightness, JPEG) for five models (OCRNet, 
DMA-Net, CrackFormer, SegCrack, ECFormer-B48).
Applied Soft Computing 189 (2026) 114513 
13 

=== Page 14 ===
Y. Li, Z. Ma and R. Ma
Table 6 
Ablation experiments on CrackSeg9k.
Model
mIoU (%)
Params (M)
GFLOPs
FPS
Baseline
77.04
0.78
0.144
212.2
+MSSRA
77.60
0.79
0.147
185.1
+ERLA
77.83
0.80
0.162
163.8
+BDCRFE
78.05
0.82
0.185
143.7
Table 7 
Performance comparison of different attention mechanisms in the HR 
branch.
Module
mIoU (%)
Params (M)
GFLOPs
FPS
Conv
77.04
0.78
0.144
212.2
MSA
77.65
0.79
0.742
62.5
SRA (𝑝= 7)
77.48
0.79
0.154
160.7
ERLA
77.45
0.79
0.144
192.0
MSSRA (𝑝= 1, 3, 5, 7)
77.60
0.79
0.147
185.1
the GFLOPs to 0.147 and slightly decreasing the FPS to 185.1, it im­
proves the performance by adding very few parameters. After replacing 
the convolution with ERLA, the mIoU reached 77.83 %, a rise of 0.79 % 
over the baseline. ERLA increased the computational costs to 0.162 
GFLOPs and decreased the FPS to 163.8. Replacing the convolution with 
BDCRFE further improved the mIoU to 78.05 %. The introduction of 
BDCRFE slightly increased the parameters to 0.82 M and the computa­
tional costs to 0.185 GFLOPs, with a frame rate of 143.7 FPS. BDCRFE’s 
bidirectional attention enhanced feature representation across different 
branches, significantly boosting the model’s performance. It is worth 
noting that the introduction of the proposed efficient attention module 
only slightly increases the model’s parameters and adds only a control­
lable computational overhead. This is because the attention mechanism 
involves only two learnable linear projections.
5.5.1 . Impact of MSSRA
To validate the effectiveness of MSSRA, the original MSA [9], SRA 
[73], and the proposed MSSRA are each used to replace the convolu­
tion in the HR branch of the baseline model. The results are shown 
in Table 7, where Conv represents the baseline. In SRA and MSSRA, 
𝑝 represents the adaptive pooling size in the spatial reduction module. 
In all configurations, the number of heads in multi-head attention is
set to 4.
From Table 7, it can be observed that, compared to the baseline 
model using only convolution, the introduction of MSA improved the 
model’s mIoU, increasing from 77.04 % to 77.65 %. However, this 
improvement comes at the cost of significantly higher computational 
complexity. Specifically, the baseline model requires only 0.144 
GFLOPs, while replacing it with MSA increases the computation by 
five times, reaching 0.742 GFLOPs. Given the modest performance 
improvement, this trade-off is inefficient.
The improvement made by SRA to MSA is immediate, as it signif­
icantly reduces computational cost from 0.742 to 0.154 GFLOPs with 
the introduction of very few additional parameters. However, compared 
to MSA, SRA does not significantly improve the performance over the 
baseline model, indicating that SRA cannot fully exploit the potential 
advantages of multi-head attention. This paper argues that the main 
difference between SRA and MSA lies in SRA’s reduction of the spatial 
resolution of the Key and Value, which is set to a fixed scale as 7 × 7 in 
PVTv2 [73]. This setup reduces the model’s ability to capture multi-scale 
information. Therefore, this paper compares SRA with different scales to 
observe the impact of spatial reduction on the self-attention mechanism. 
Specifically, the model’s performance is compared with reduction factors 
𝑝 set to 1, 3, 5, 7, 11, 23, and 45, as shown in Fig. 14.
In Fig. 14(a), it can be observed that the performance of the SRA 
gradually approaches that of the MSA as 𝑝 continues to increase, but 
the magnitude of the increase gradually tapers off. In addition, compar­
ing in Fig. 14(b), it is further observed that the increase in 𝑝 leads to a 
much larger increase in computational overhead than the performance 
gain it brings. Based on the above observations, this paper follows the 
setup of PVTv2 [73], but limits the maximum adaptive pooling size to 
7×7, while setting three smaller scales of 1, 3, and 5. Each spatial reduc­
tion operation is applied to a different attention head, with the results 
shown in the last row of Table 7. To further validate our choice of the 
multi-scale pooling configuration for MSSRA, we also conducted a sen­
sitivity study. Based on our findings in Fig. 14(b), which indicate that 
pooling sizes larger than 7 offer diminishing performance returns at a 
significantly higher computational cost, our analysis of different config­
urations focused on a range of more efficient pooling sizes. The results 
in Table 8 demonstrate the superiority of our balanced {1,3,5,7} config­
uration. We found that alternative setups, which either lacked sufficient 
global context (e.g., {4,5,6,7}) or failed to preserve fine-grained spa­
tial details (e.g., {1,2,3,4}), both resulted in a drop in performance. 
This confirms that an effective multi-scale approach must capture a 
wide spectrum of features, from global context to local details, and our 
proposed configuration strikes the optimal trade-off.
Compared to SRA, MSSRA further reduces computational costs while 
maintaining the same level of inference efficiency, but its performance 
is closer to MSA. Taking the convolution-based baseline model and an 
MSA-based model as the upper and lower bounds for comparison, it 
can be concluded that SRA significantly improves computational effi­
ciency by reducing computational costs, while the proposed MSSRA, by 
Fig. 14. Effect of pooling size 𝑝 on IoU and FLOPs.
Applied Soft Computing 189 (2026) 114513 
14 

=== Page 15 ===
Y. Li, Z. Ma and R. Ma
Table 8 
Sensitivity analysis of different pooling 
configurations for MSSRA.
Configuration
mIoU(%)
GFLOPs
𝑝=1, 2, 3, 4
77.25
0.145
𝑝=4, 5, 6, 7
77.18
0.152
𝑝=1, 5, 9, 13
77.51
0.192
𝑝=1, 3, 5, 7
77.60
0.147
Table 9 
Performance comparison of different attention mechanisms in the LR 
branch.
Module
mIoU (%)
Params (M)
GFLOPs
FPS
Conv
77.04
0.78
0.144
212.2
MSA
77.60
0.79
0.516
105.3
RLA
77.47
0.79
0.148
195.8
MSSRA(𝑝= 1, 3, 5, 7)
77.36
0.79
0.145
201.6
ERLA
77.58
0.79
0.158
189.1
introducing multi-scale learning capability, achieves a better balance 
between performance and efficiency compared to SRA.
Additionally, the performance of ERLA in the HR branch is com­
pared. ERLA’s performance is close to SRA but inferior to the proposed 
MSSRA, and such results are related to the different roles of the branches. 
The HR branch maintains a fixed resolution throughout, mainly fo­
cusing on capturing intricate edges and texture information in crack 
images. The proposed MSSRA, through multi-scale pooling operations, 
enables the model to simultaneously focus on features at different 
scales. By applying spatial reduction operations at various scales across 
multiple self-attention heads, it preserves key information at different 
scales. Consequently, the model can capture both large-scale global 
structures and small-scale crack details. In contrast, ERLA is primar­
ily designed to enhance global modeling capability in a large receptive 
field, which explains its weaker performance in the HR path compared 
to MSSRA. This validates the rationale for using MSSRA in the HR
branch.
5.5.2 . Impact of ERLA
The original MSA [9], the original RLA [68], and the proposed ERLA 
are replaced with the convolution of the LR branch in ECFormer to ex­
plore their effects on the model performance, and the results are shown 
in Table 9.
From the experiment, a phenomenon similar to the HR branch 
can be observed. The introduction of MSA effectively improves per­
formance, but the computational cost is 3.6 times higher than the 
baseline model, increasing from 0.144 to 0.516 GFLOPs. In contrast, 
RLA improves performance over the baseline model, while the compu­
tational overhead is drastically reduced from 0.516 GFLOPs to 0.148 
GFLOPs compared to the MSA, suggesting that RLA can control the con­
sumption of computational resources more effectively. However, the 
performance improvement of RLA relative to the baseline is not as 
substantial as that of MSA. The introduction of ERLA achieves a bet­
ter balance between performance and computational cost. Specifically, 
ERLA improves mIoU from 77.47 % to 77.58 %, surpassing RLA but 
slightly lower than MSA. In terms of computational cost, ERLA remains 
at the same level as the baseline model and is far lower than MSA, reduc­
ing from 0.516 to 0.158 GFLOPs. Such results show that ERLA is a more 
practical and efficient choice, as it maintains high performance while 
avoiding the excessive computational resource consumption associated
with MSA.
The result of applying MSSRA to the LR branch is also compared. The 
main role of MSSRA is to enhance the model’s ability to learn at multi 
scales, whereas the LR branch is designed to learn global features as a 
complement to the HR branch. As observed in Table 9, ERLA achieves 
Table 10 
Performance comparison of different fusion methods.
Module
mIoU(%)
Params(M)
GFLOPs
FPS
Conv
77.04
0.78
0.144
212.2
H2LCA (MSA)
77.53
0.79
0.545
92.7
H2LCA (MSSRA)
77.49
0.79
0.147
183.8
L2HCA (MSA)
77.28
0.79
0.544
95.5
L2HCA (ERLA)
77.20
0.79
0.158
187.2
BDCRFE (MSA)
77.68
0.81
0.982
43.6
BDCRFE (MSSRA, ERLA)
77.62
0.81
0.165
170.1
better performance than MSSRA, which confirms the earlier analysis that 
a specific branch serves distinct capability.
5.5.3 . Impact of BDCRFE
Global and detailed features are two key attributes for representing 
crack images and are crucial for achieving high-performance seman­
tic segmentation. Relying solely on one type of feature for prediction 
leads to suboptimal results. The proposed BDCRFE treats the HR and 
LR branches as features from different modalities and establishes an 
effective communication channel between the branches using cross-
attention.
Table 10 presents the results of different feature fusion methods, 
where Conv indicates the use of element-wise addition in the baseline 
model [50], H2LCA indicates that Query in cross-attention is from the 
HR branch and Key and Value are from the LR branch, and L2HCA is 
the opposite. It can be observed that all attention-based fusion meth­
ods outperform the baseline, demonstrating that element-wise addition 
fusion is insufficient. When comparing the fusion methods of H2LCA 
and L2HCA, H2LCA consistently outperforms L2HCA, indicating that the 
HR branch has a greater impact on the model’s performance. BDCRFE 
surpasses both H2LCA and L2HCA, suggesting that the bidirectional 
use of cross-attention more effectively leverages the feature information 
from different branches during HR and LR feature fusion. Specifically, 
BDCRFE with MSA improves mIoU performance by 0.15 % and 0.4 % 
compared to H2LCA and L2HCA, respectively.
In addition to the original MSA, the proposed MSSRA and ERLA 
are also compared here. Specifically, MSSRA and ERLA are substituted 
for the MSA in H2LCA and L2HCA. As observed in Table 10, the re­
sults are consistent with the previous Sections 5.5.1 and 5.5.2. The 
proposed efficient attention modules effectively reduce computational 
costs, but the model’s mIoU only shows a slight decrease, from 77.68 % 
to 77.62 %. Considering the significant improvement in model infer­
ence speed, from 43.6 FPS to 170.1 FPS, such trade-off offers a highly 
cost-effective balance.
6 . Limitations and future work
Although the proposed ECFormer performs well across multiple 
datasets, it is important to acknowledge its limitations and outline 
directions for future research.
First, concerning computational efficiency and deployment scenar­
ios, while ECFormer demonstrates a superior trade-off between per­
formance and efficiency compared to other state-of-the-art models, its 
Transformer-based architecture is inherently more complex than spe­
cialized lightweight CNNs. This may pose challenges for deployment in 
extremely resource-constrained environments, such as on embedded or 
edge devices. Therefore, a direct comparative study against architec­
tures specifically designed for mobile platforms (e.g., MobileNet-based 
segmentation models) would be a valuable future investigation to fully 
characterize the performance-versus-resource trade-offs. Furthermore, 
exploring model compression techniques, such as quantization and 
pruning, is another promising direction to adapt ECFormer for edge 
computing applications.
Second, regarding model robustness and specific failure modes, we 
observed that ECFormer’s performance can deteriorate when facing 
Applied Soft Computing 189 (2026) 114513 
15 

=== Page 16 ===
Y. Li, Z. Ma and R. Ma
significant image quality degradation, such as severe noise and light­
ing changes found in the Asphalt3k and Concrete3k datasets. More 
specifically, our qualitative analysis indicates that the model may
occasionally fail to detect extremely fine or discontinuous cracks, or mis­
classify complex background textures that mimic crack patterns. While 
ECFormer generally shows strong resilience, future work should include 
more systematic robustness testing against controlled noise, lighting 
variations, and other corruptions. Developing mechanisms to specif­
ically enhance the detection of these challenging, fine-grained crack 
features is another critical research avenue.
Finally, in terms of generalization and data dependency, the model’s 
performance was validated on three comprehensive datasets, but its gen­
eralizability to unseen crack morphologies or different material types 
remains to be further explored. This limitation is tied to a broader chal­
lenge in the field: the scarcity of large-scale, high-quality annotated 
crack datasets. To this end, a promising future direction is to leverage 
parameter-efficient fine-tuning methods, such as Adapters [91], to trans­
fer knowledge from large-scale pre-trained vision models (e.g., SAM [92] 
and CLIP [93]) to the crack segmentation task. This could significantly 
enhance model generalization and robustness without requiring massive 
task-specific datasets.
7 . Conclusions
Research on Transformer-based crack recognition is gaining increas­
ing attention, as its self-attention mechanism, when applied to images, 
naturally possesses long-range modeling capability and a global re­
ceptive field. However, its quadratic complexity with respect to the 
input sequence results in computational costs that are difficult to accept 
when processing high-resolution images. To address this issue, our pa­
per introduces three efficient attention modules and designs an efficient 
crack segmentation model, ECFormer. For the HR branch, which pri­
marily learns the local features of cracks, a multi-scale spatial-reduction 
attention module is designed. This module significantly reduces compu­
tational complexity by performing spatial reduction on feature maps at 
multiple scales while adapting to the feature extraction needs of targets 
at different scales, allowing the model to excel in capturing multi-scale 
features. For the LR branch, which primarily learns global semantic 
features, an enhanced ReLU-based linear attention module is designed. 
While maintaining a global receptive field, this module reduces the com­
putational complexity to a linear level. The enhanced linear attention 
module improves feature discrimination and model expressiveness by 
adjusting the direction of each Query and Key, bringing similar features 
closer together and pushing dissimilar features further apart. To achieve 
efficient fusion of HR and LR features, a bidirectional cross-resolution 
feature enhancer is designed. This module establishes an effective fea­
ture exchange channel between the HR and LR branches through a 
bidirectional cross-attention mechanism, enhancing the model’s fea­
ture fusion and overall performance. Comprehensive evaluations on 
general crack datasets and specific scenario crack datasets show that 
ECFormer consistently outperforms other comparison models. To pro­
mote advancements in the field of crack recognition, the data and code 
from this paper will be made publicly available at https://github.com/
CHDyshli/efficient_crack_transformer.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Yongshang Li: Writing – original draft, Validation, Methodology, 
Investigation, Data curation, Conceptualization. Zihan Ma: Visua­
lization, Validation. Ronggui Ma: Supervision, Resources, Project ad­
ministration.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence 
the work reported in this paper.
Table A.1 
Severity parameterization for four corruptions on CrackSeg9k. All operators 
act on per-channel normalized images in [0, 1]; formal definitions are given in 
Eqs. (A.1)–(A.4).
Corruption
𝑠=1
𝑠=2
𝑠=3
𝑠=4
𝑠=5
Gaussian noise 𝜎 ( × 1/255)
5
10
15
20
25
Motion blur length 𝐿 (pixels; random angle)
3
5
7
9
11
Brightness shift (additive, %)
±10
±20
±30
±40
±50
JPEG quality 𝑄
90
70
50
30
10
Appendix A . Robustness corruptions for CrackSeg9k: definitions 
and parameters
This appendix formalizes the four corruption operators used in 
Section 5.4: Gaussian noise, motion blur, brightness shift, and JPEG 
compression. Parameter values follow the five severity levels (𝑠=1–5) 
in Table A.1. The operators correspond one-to-one to the columns used 
in the results of Section 5.4.
Let 𝑥∈[0, 1]𝐻×𝑊×𝐶 be the input image. Unless stated, evaluation 
uses batch= 1, input 400×400, no test-time augmentation. Randomness 
arises from Gaussian noise and the motion-blur angle; results are aver­
aged over 𝑁 repeats with fixed seeds. All operators act in the [0, 1] do­
main and end with clipping to [0, 1]. Convolution uses bilinear sampling 
for subpixel offsets and reflect padding at borders.
Gaussian noise (additive). The operator adds i.i.d. Gaussian noise to 
each channel: 
𝑥′ = clip(𝑥+ (𝜎∕255)𝜖, 0, 1),
𝜖∼N (0, 𝐼).
(A.1)
Applied independently per channel. Severity mapping: 𝜎
∈
{5, 10, 15, 20, 25} corresponds to {5, 10, 15, 20, 25}∕255.
Motion blur. The operator convolves the image with a normalized line 
kernel: 
𝑥′ = 𝑥∗𝑘𝐿,𝜃,
(A.2)
where ∗ denotes channel-wise 2D convolution and 𝑘𝐿,𝜃 is a line point-
spread function of length 𝐿 at angle 𝜃. The angle 𝜃 is drawn uniformly 
from [0, 𝜋) once per image. Convolution uses bilinear sampling for sub­
pixel offsets and reflect padding at borders. Severity mapping: 𝐿∈
{3, 5, 7, 9, 11} (pixels).
Brightness shift. The operator adds a constant offset to all channels: 
𝑥′ = clip(𝑥+ 𝛽, 0, 1).
(A.3)
The per-image constant 𝛽 is applied uniformly to all channels. Severity 
mapping: 𝛽∈{±0.10, ±0.20, ±0.30, ±0.40, ±0.50}.
JPEG compression. The operator applies a codec round trip in the 8-bit 
domain: 
𝑥′ = JPEG−1(JPEG(round(255𝑥), 𝑄))∕255,
(A.4)
using a standard JPEG implementation with YCbCr 4:2:0 subsampling. 
Severity mapping: 𝑄
∈
{90, 70, 50, 30, 10} (quality factor; lower is 
stronger).
Data availability
Data will be made available on request.
References
[1] D. Ai, G. Jiang, S.-K. Lam, P. He, C. Li, Computer vision framework for crack detec­
tion of civil infrastructure: a review, Eng. Appl. Artif. Intell. 117 (2023) 105478, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.engappai.2022.105478
[2] N.S.P. Peraka, K.P. Biligiri, Pavement asset management systems and technologies: 
a review, Autom. Constr. 119 (2020) 103336, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.autcon.
2020.103336
Applied Soft Computing 189 (2026) 114513 
16 

=== Page 17 ===
Y. Li, Z. Ma and R. Ma
[3] J. Guo, P. Liu, B. Xiao, L. Deng, Q. Wang, Surface defect detection of civil structures 
using images: review from data perspective, Autom. Constr. 158 (2024) 105186, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.autcon.2023.105186
[4] Y.-A. Hsieh, Y.J. Tsai, Machine learning for crack detection: review and model 
performance comparison, J. Comput. Civ. Eng. 34 (5) (2020) 04020038, https:
//doi.org/10.1061/(ASCE)CP.1943-5487.0000918
[5] N. Kheradmandi, V. Mehranfar, A critical review and comparative study on image 
segmentation-based techniques for pavement crack detection, Constr. Build. Mater. 
321 (2022) 126162, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.conbuildmat.2021.126162
[6] K. Simonyan, A. Zisserman, Very deep convolutional networks for large-scale image 
recognition, arXiv preprint (2014), https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1409.1556
[7] I.J. Goodfellow, J. Shlens, C. Szegedy, Explaining and harnessing adversarial 
examples, arXiv preprint (2014), https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1412.6572
[8] I. Vasiljevic, A. Chakrabarti, G. Shakhnarovich, Examining the impact of blur on 
recognition by convolutional networks, arXiv preprint (2016), https://doi.org/10.
48550/arXiv.1611.05760
[9] A. Vaswani, N.M. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones, A.N. Gomez, L. Kaiser, 
I. Polosukhin, Attention is all you need, in: Proceedings of the 31st International 
Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2017, pp. 6000–6010, 
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1706.03762
[10] A. Dosovitskiy, L. Beyer, A. Kolesnikov, D. Weissenborn, X. Zhai, T. Unterthiner, M. 
Dehghani, M. Minderer, G. Heigold, S. Gelly, J. Uszkoreit, N. Houlsby, An image is 
worth 16x16 words: transformers for image recognition at scale, in: International 
Conference on Learning Representations, 2021, https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.
2010.11929
[11] S. Khan, M. Naseer, M. Hayat, S.W. Zamir, F.S. Khan, M. Shah, Transformers in 
Vision: a survey, ACM Comput. Surv. 54 (10s) (2022) 1–41, https://doi.org/10.
1145/3505244
[12] Y. Liu, Y. Zhang, Y. Wang, F. Hou, J. Yuan, J. Tian, Y. Zhang, Z. Shi, J. Fan, Z. 
He, A survey of visual transformers, IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst. (2023), 
https://doi.org/10.1109/TNNLS.2022.3227717
[13] H.D. Cheng, X.J. Shi, C. Glazier, Real-time image thresholding based on sample 
space reduction and interpolation approach, J. Comput. Civ. Eng. 17 (4) (2003) 
264–272, https://doi.org/10.1061/(ASCE)0887-3801(2003)17:4(264)
[14] Y.-C. Tsai, V. Kaul, R.M. Mersereau, Critical assessment of pavement distress seg­
mentation methods, J. Transp. Eng. 136 (1) (2010) 11–19, https://doi.org/10.
1061/(ASCE)TE.1943-5436.0000051
[15] J. Tang, Y. Gu, Automatic crack detection and segmentation using a hybrid algo­
rithm for road distress analysis, in: 2013 IEEE International Conference on Systems, 
Man, and Cybernetics, IEEE, 2013, pp. 3026–3030, https://doi.org/10.1109/SMC.
2013.516
[16] N.-D. Hoang, Detection of surface crack in building structures using image process­
ing technique with an improved otsu method for image thresholding, Adv. Civ. Eng. 
2018 (1) (2018) 3924120, https://doi.org/10.1155/2018/3924120
[17] S. Liang, X. Jianchun, Z. Xun, An algorithm for concrete crack extraction and iden­
tification based on machine vision, IEEE Access 6 (2018) 28993–29002, https:
//doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2018.2844100
[18] Q. Li, X. Liu, Novel approach to pavement image segmentation based on neigh­
boring difference histogram method, in: 2008 Congress on Image and Signal 
Processing, vol. 2, IEEE, 2008, pp. 792–796, https://doi.org/10.1109/CISP.2008.
13
[19] Y. Fujita, Y. Hamamoto, A robust automatic crack detection method from noisy 
concrete surfaces, Mach. Vis. Appl. 22 (2011) 245–254, https://doi.org/10.1007/
s00138-009-0244-5
[20] A. Cubero-Fernandez, F.J. Rodriguez-Lozano, R. Villatoro, J. Olivares, J.M. 
Palomares, Efficient pavement crack detection and classification, EURASIP J. 
Image Video Process. 2017 (2017) 1–11, https://doi.org/10.1186/s13640-017-
0187-0
[21] Q. Wang, N. Zhang, K. Jiang, C. Ma, Z. Zhou, C. Dai, Tunnel lining crack recognition 
based on improved multiscale retinex and Sobel edge detection, Math. Probl. Eng. 
2021 (1) (2021) 9969464, https://doi.org/10.1155/2021/9969464
[22] H. Han, H. Deng, Q. Dong, X. Gu, T. Zhang, Y. Wang, An advanced otsu method 
integrated with edge detection and decision tree for crack detection in highway 
transportation infrastructure, Adv. Mater. Sci. Eng. 2021 (1) (2021) 9205509, 
https://doi.org/10.1155/2021/9205509
[23] S.G. Monicka, D. Manimegalai, M. Karthikeyan, Detection of microcracks in sili­
con solar cells using otsu-canny edge detection algorithm, Renew. Energ. Focus 43 
(2022) 183–190, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ref.2022.09.002
[24] J. Canny, A computational approach to edge detection, IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. 
Mach. Intell. (6) (1986) 679–698, https://doi.org/10.1109/TPAMI.1986.4767851
[25] N. Kanopoulos, N. Vasanthavada, R.L. Baker, Design of an image edge detection 
filter using the Sobel operator, IEEE J. Solid-State Circuit 23 (2) (1988) 358–367, 
https://doi.org/10.1109/4.996
[26] R. Nigam, S.K. Singh, Crack detection in a beam using wavelet transform and 
photographic measurements, in: Structures, vol. 25, Elsevier, 2020, pp. 436–447, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.istruc.2020.03.010
[27] S. Lang, F. Zheng, P. Li, C. Meng, A Gabor filter based weak crack detection method 
for glassivation passivation parts wafer, Meas. Sci. Technol. 35 (2) (2023) 025013, 
https://doi.org/10.1088/1361-6501/ad080e
[28] H. Zoubir, M. Rguig, M. El Aroussi, R. Saadane, A. Chehri, Pixel-level concrete 
bridge crack detection using convolutional neural networks, gabor filters, and at­
tention mechanisms, Eng. Struct. 314 (2024) 118343, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
engstruct.2024.118343
[29] E.A. Martinez-Ríos, R. Bustamante-Bello, S.A. Navarro-Tuch, Generalized Morse 
wavelets parameter selection and transfer learning for pavement transverse
cracking detection, Eng. Appl. Artif. Intell. 123 (2023) 106355, https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.engappai.2023.106355
[30] N. Gehri, J. Mata-Falcón, W. Kaufmann, Automated crack detection and measure­
ment based on digital image correlation, Constr. Build. Mater. 256 (2020) 119383, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.conbuildmat.2020.119383
[31] M. Wu, W. Wang, D. Zhang, B. Deng, S. Liu, J. Lu, Y. Luo, W. Zhao, The pixel crack 
reconstruction method: from fracture image to crack geological model for fracture 
evolution simulation, Constr. Build. Mater. 273 (2021) 121733, https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.conbuildmat.2020.121733
[32] S.-Y. Kong, J.-S. Fan, Y.-F. Liu, X.-C. Wei, X.-W. Ma, Automated crack assessment 
and quantitative growth monitoring, Comput.-Aided Civ. Infrastruct. Eng. 36 (5) 
(2021) 656–674, https://doi.org/10.1111/mice.12626
[33] U.A. Nnolim, Automated crack segmentation via saturation channel thresholding, 
area classification and fusion of modified level set segmentation with canny edge 
detection, Heliyon 6 (12) (2020), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.heliyon.2020.e05748
[34] S. Das, S. Dutta, D. Adak, S. Majumdar, On the crack characterization of reinforced 
concrete structures: experimental and data-driven numerical study, Structures 30 
(2021) 134–145, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.istruc.2020.12.069
[35] Y. Liu, J.K.W. Yeoh, Robust pixel-wise concrete crack segmentation and properties 
retrieval using image patches, Autom. Constr. 123 (2021) 103535, https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.autcon.2020.103535
[36] J. Long, E. Shelhamer, T. Darrell, Fully convolutional networks for semantic seg­
mentation, in: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and 
Pattern Recognition, 2015, pp. 3431–3440.
[37] S. Wang, Y. Pan, M. Chen, Y. Zhang, X. Wu, Fcn-Sfw: steel structure crack segmen­
tation using a fully convolutional network and structured forests, IEEE Access 8 
(2020) 214358–214373, https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2020.3040939
[38] K. Chaiyasarn, A. Buatik, H. Mohamad, M. Zhou, S. Kongsilp, N. Poovarodom, 
Integrated pixel-level Cnn-fcn crack detection via photogrammetric 3d texture 
mapping of concrete structures, Autom. Constr. 140 (2022) 104388, https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.autcon.2022.104388
[39] F.-C. Chen, M.R. Jahanshahi, Arf-crack: rotation invariant deep fully convolutional 
network for pixel-level crack detection, Mach. Vis. Appl. 31 (6) (2020) 47, https:
//doi.org/10.1007/s00138-020-01098-x
[40] O. Ronneberger, P. Fischer, T. Brox, U-net: convolutional networks for biomed­
ical image segmentation, in: Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted 
Intervention–MICCAI 2015: 18th International Conference, Munich, Germany, 
October 5-9, 2015, Proceedings, Part III 18, Springer, 2015, pp. 234–241, https:
//doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-24574-4_28
[41] X. Gao, B. Tong, Mra-unet: balancing speed and accuracy in road crack segmen­
tation network, Signal Image Video Process. 17 (5) (2023) 2093–2100, https:
//doi.org/10.1007/s11760-022-02423-9
[42] F. Liu, L. Wang, Unet-based model for crack detection integrating visual ex­
planations, Constr. Build. Mater. 322 (2022) 126265, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
conbuildmat.2021.126265
[43] F. Panella, A. Lipani, J. Boehm, Semantic segmentation of cracks: data challenges 
and architecture, Autom. Constr. 135 (2022) 104110, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
autcon.2021.104110
[44] L.-C. Chen, G. Papandreou, I. Kokkinos, K. Murphy, A.L. Yuille, Deeplab: semantic 
image segmentation with Deep convolutional nets, atrous convolution, and fully 
connected CRFS, IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 40 (4) (2017) 834–848, 
https://doi.org/10.1109/TPAMI.2017.2699184
[45] L.-C. Chen, Y. Zhu, G. Papandreou, F. Schroff, H. Adam, Encoder-decoder with 
atrous separable convolution for semantic image segmentation, in: Proceedings of 
the European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), 2018, pp. 801–818, https:
//doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01234-2_49
[46] Z. Qu, C. Cao, L. Liu, D.-Y. Zhou, A deeply supervised convolutional neural net­
work for pavement crack detection with multiscale feature fusion, IEEE Trans. 
Neural Netw. Learn. Syst. 33 (9) (2021) 4890–4899, https://doi.org/10.1109/
TNNLS.2021.3062070
[47] X. Sun, Y. Xie, L. Jiang, Y. Cao, B. Liu, Dma-net: deeplab with multi-scale attention 
for pavement crack segmentation, IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst. 23 (10) (2022) 
18392–18403, https://doi.org/10.1109/TITS.2022.3158670
[48] Z. Al-Huda, B. Peng, R.N.A. Algburi, M.A. Al-Antari, A.-J. Rabea, D. Zhai, A hybrid 
deep learning pavement crack semantic segmentation, Eng. Appl. Artif. Intell. 122 
(2023) 106142, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.engappai.2023.106142
[49] J. Wang, K. Sun, T. Cheng, B. Jiang, C. Deng, Y. Zhao, D. Liu, Y. Mu, M. Tan, X. 
Wang, et al., Deep high-resolution representation learning for visual recognition, 
IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 43 (10) (2020) 3349–3364, https://doi.org/
10.1109/TPAMI.2020.2983686
[50] Y. Li, R. Ma, H. Liu, G. Cheng, Real-time high-resolution neural network with 
semantic guidance for crack segmentation, Autom. Constr. 156 (2023) 105112, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.autcon.2023.105112
[51] H. Chu, W. Chen, L. Deng, Cascade operation-enhanced high-resolution represen­
tation learning for meticulous segmentation of bridge cracks, Adv. Eng. Inform. 61 
(2024) 102508, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aei.2024.102508
[52] A.A. Zhang, K.C.P. Wang, Y. Liu, Y. Zhan, G. Yang, G. Wang, E. Yang, H. Zhang, 
Z. Dong, A. He, et al., Intelligent pixel-level detection of multiple distresses and 
surface design features on asphalt pavements, Comput.-Aided Civ. Infrastruct. Eng. 
37 (13) (2022) 1654–1673, https://doi.org/10.1111/mice.12909
[53] B. Chen, H. Zhang, G. Wang, J. Huo, Y. Li, L. Li, Automatic concrete infrastruc­
ture crack semantic segmentation using deep learning, Autom. Constr. 152 (2023) 
104950, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.autcon.2023.104950
[54] H. Liu, J. Yang, X. Miao, C. Mertz, H. Kong, Crackformer network for pavement 
crack segmentation, IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst. 24 (9) (2023) 9240–9252, 
https://doi.org/10.1109/TITS.2023.3266776
Applied Soft Computing 189 (2026) 114513 
17 

=== Page 18 ===
Y. Li, Z. Ma and R. Ma
[55] Y. Zhang, L. Zhang, Detection of pavement cracks by deep learning models of 
transformer and UNET, IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst. (2024), https://doi.org/
10.1109/TITS.2024.3420763
[56] C. Xiang, J. Guo, R. Cao, L. Deng, A crack-segmentation algorithm fusing transform­
ers and convolutional neural networks for complex detection scenarios, Autom. 
Constr. 152 (2023) 104894, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.autcon.2023.104894
[57] E.A. Shamsabadi, C. Xu, A.S. Rao, T. Nguyen, T. Ngo, D. Dias-da Costa, Vision 
transformer-based autonomous crack detection on asphalt and concrete sur­
faces, Autom. Constr. 140 (2022) 104316, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.autcon.2022.
104316
[58] S. Xiao, K. Shang, K. Lin, Q. Wu, H. Gu, Z. Zhang, Pavement crack detection with 
hybrid-window attentive vision transformers, Int. J. Appl. Earth Obs. Geoinf. 116 
(2023) 103172, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jag.2022.103172
[59] Z. Zhang, W. Wang, X. Tian, Semantic segmentation of metal surface defects and 
corresponding strategies, IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas. 72 (2023) 1–13, https://doi.
org/10.1109/TIM.2023.3282301
[60] Y. Huang, Y. Liu, F. Liu, W. Liu, A lightweight feature attention fusion network 
for pavement crack segmentation, Comput.-Aided Civ. Infrastruct. Eng. (2024), 
https://doi.org/10.1111/mice.13225
[61] H. Cai, J. Li, M. Hu, C. Gan, S. Han, Efficientvit: lightweight multi-scale at­
tention for high-resolution dense prediction, in: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF 
International Conference on Computer Vision, 2023, pp. 17302–17313, https:
//doi.org/10.1109/ICCV51070.2023.01587
[62] Z. Liu, Y. Lin, Y. Cao, H. Hu, Y. Wei, Z. Zhang, S. Lin, B. Guo, Swin transformer: 
hierarchical vision transformer using shifted windows, in: Proceedings of the 
IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, 2021, pp. 10012–10022, 
https://doi.org/10.1109/ICCV48922.2021.00986
[63] R. Child, S. Gray, A. Radford, I. Sutskever, Generating long sequences with sparse 
transformers, arXiv preprint (2019), https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1904.10509
[64] A. Vyas, A. Katharopoulos, F. Fleuret, Fast transformers with clustered attention, 
arXiv preprint (2020), https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2007.04825
[65] S. Wang, L. Zhou, Z. Gan, Y.-C. Chen, Y. Fang, S. Sun, Y. Cheng, J. Liu, Cluster-
former: clustering-based sparse transformer for long-range dependency encoding, 
arXiv preprint (2020), https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2009.06097
[66] S. Wang, B.Z. Li, M. Khabsa, H. Fang, H. Ma, Linformer: self-attention with linear 
complexity, arXiv preprint (2020), https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2006.04768
[67] K.M. Choromanski, V. Likhosherstov, D. Dohan, X. Song, A. Gane, T. Sarlos, P. 
Hawkins, J.Q. Davis, A. Mohiuddin, L. Kaiser, D.B. Belanger, L.J. Colwell, A. Weller, 
Rethinking attention with performers, in: International Conference on Learning 
Representations, 2021, https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2009.14794
[68] A. Katharopoulos, A. Vyas, N. Pappas, F. Fleuret, Transformers are RNNS: fast au­
toregressive transformers with linear attention, in: International Conference on 
Machine Learning, PMLR, 2020, pp. 5156–5165, https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.
2006.16236
[69] A. Jaegle, F. Gimeno, A. Brock, O. Vinyals, A. Zisserman, J. Carreira, Perceiver: gen­
eral perception with iterative attention, in: International Conference on Machine 
Learning, PMLR, 2021, pp. 4651–4664, https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2103.
03206
[70] Z. Dai, G. Lai, Y. Yang, Q. Le, Funnel-transformer: filtering out sequential re­
dundancy for efficient language processing, in: Advances in Neural Information 
Processing Systems, vol. 33, 2020, pp. 4271–4282, https://doi.org/10.48550/
arXiv.2006.03236
[71] M. Sandler, A. Howard, M. Zhu, A. Zhmoginov, L.-C. Chen, Mobilenetv2: inverted 
residuals and linear bottlenecks, in: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on 
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2018, pp. 4510–4520, https://doi.org/
10.1109/CVPR.2018.00474
[72] W. Wang, E. Xie, X. Li, D.-P. Fan, K. Song, D. Liang, T. Lu, P. Luo, L. Shao, Pyramid 
vision transformer: a versatile backbone for dense prediction without convolutions, 
in: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, 
2021, pp. 568–578, https://doi.org/10.1109/ICCV48922.2021.00061
[73] W. Wang, E. Xie, X. Li, D.-P. Fan, K. Song, D. Liang, T. Lu, P. Luo, L. Shao, Pvt 
v2: improved baselines with pyramid vision transformer, Comput. Vis. Media 8 (3) 
(2022) 415–424, https://doi.org/10.1007/s41095-022-0274-8
[74] H. Pan, Y. Hong, W. Sun, Y. Jia, Deep dual-resolution networks for real-time and 
accurate semantic segmentation of traffic scenes, IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst. 
24 (3) (2022) 3448–3460, https://doi.org/10.1109/TITS.2022.3228042
[75] C.-F.R. Chen, Q. Fan, R. Panda, Crossvit: cross-attention multi-scale vision trans­
former for image classification, in: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International 
Conference on Computer Vision, 2021, pp. 357–366, https://doi.org/10.1109/
ICCV48922.2021.00041
[76] J. Wang, C. Gou, Q. Wu, H. Feng, J. Han, E. Ding, J. Wang, Rtformer: effi­
cient design for real-time semantic segmentation with transformer, in: Advances 
in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 35, 2022, pp. 7423–7436, https:
//doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2210.07124
[77] L.H. Li, P. Zhang, H. Zhang, J. Yang, C. Li, Y. Zhong, L. Wang, L. Yuan, L. Zhang, 
J.-N. Hwang, et al., Grounded language-image pre-training, in: Proceedings of the 
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2022, pp. 
10965–10975, https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR52688.2022.01069
[78] S. Liu, Z. Zeng, T. Ren, F. Li, H. Zhang, J. Yang, C. Li, J. Yang, H. Su, J. Zhu, 
et al., Grounding DINO: marrying DINO with grounded pre-training for open-set
object detection, arXiv preprint (2023), https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2303.
05499
[79] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, J. Sun, Deep residual learning for image recognition, 
in: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern 
Recognition, 2016, pp. 770–778, https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.2016.90
[80] S. Kulkarni, S. Singh, D. Balakrishnan, S. Sharma, S. Devunuri, S.C.R. Korlapati, 
Crackseg9k: a collection and benchmark for crack segmentation datasets and 
frameworks, in: European Conference on Computer Vision, Springer, 2022, pp. 
179–195, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-25082-8_12
[81] A. Paszke, S. Gross, F. Massa, A. Lerer, J. Bradbury, G. Chanan, T. Killeen, Z. Lin, 
N. Gimelshein, L. Antiga, A. Desmaison, A. Kopf, E. Yang, Z. DeVito, M. Raison, 
A. Tejani, S. Chilamkurthy, B. Steiner, L. Fang, J. Bai, S. Chintala, Pytorch: an 
imperative style, high-performance deep learning library, in: Advances in Neural 
Information Processing Systems, vol. 32, 2019, pp. 8026–8037, https://doi.org/
10.48550/arXiv.1912.01703
[82] M. Contributors, Mmsegmentation: openmmlab semantic segmentation toolbox 
and benchmark, 2020, https://github.com/open-mmlab/mmsegmentation. 
[83] I. Loshchilov, F. Hutter, Decoupled weight decay regularization, in: International 
Conference on Learning Representations, 2019, https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.
1711.05101
[84] C. Yu, C. Gao, J. Wang, G. Yu, C. Shen, N. Sang, Bisenet v2: bilateral network with 
guided aggregation for real-time semantic segmentation, Int. J. Comput. Vis. 129 
(2021) 3051–3068, https://doi.org/10.1007/s11263-021-01515-2
[85] Y. Yuan, X. Chen, J. Wang, Object-contextual representations for semantic seg­
mentation, in: Computer Vision–ECCV 2020: 16th European Conference, Glasgow, 
UK, August 23–28, 2020, Proceedings, Part VI 16, Springer, 2020, pp. 173–190, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58539-6_11
[86] E. Xie, W. Wang, Z. Yu, A. Anandkumar, J.M. Alvarez, P. Luo, Segformer: simple 
and efficient design for semantic segmentation with transformers, in: Advances in 
Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 34, 2021, pp. 12077–12090, https:
//doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2105.15203
[87] F. Guo, Y. Qian, J. Liu, H. Yu, Pavement crack detection based on transformer 
network, Autom. Constr. 145 (2023) 104646, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.autcon.
2022.104646
[88] W. Wang, C. Su, Automatic concrete crack segmentation model based on trans­
former, Autom. Constr. 139 (2022) 104275, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.autcon.
2022.104275
[89] D. Hendrycks, T. Dietterich, Benchmarking neural network robustness to com­
mon corruptions and perturbations, 2019, https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1903.
12261
[90] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, J. Sun, Delving deep into rectifiers: surpassing human-level 
performance on Imagenet classification, in: Proceedings of the IEEE International 
Conference on Computer Vision, 2015, pp. 1026–1034, https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.autcon.2022.104275
[91] Z. Chen, Y. Duan, W. Wang, J. He, T. Lu, J. Dai, Y. Qiao, Vision transformer adapter 
for dense predictions, in: The Eleventh International Conference on Learning 
Representations, 2022, https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2205.08534
[92] A. Kirillov, E. Mintun, N. Ravi, H. Mao, C. Rolland, L. Gustafson, T. Xiao, S. 
Whitehead, A.C. Berg, W.-Y. Lo, et al., Segment anything, in: Proceedings of the 
IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, 2023, pp. 4015–4026, 
https://doi.org/10.1109/ICCV51070.2023.00371
[93] A. Radford, J.W. Kim, C. Hallacy, A. Ramesh, G. Goh, S. Agarwal, G. Sastry, A. 
Askell, P. Mishkin, J. Clark, et al., Learning transferable visual models from natural 
language supervision, in: International Conference on Machine Learning, PMLR, 
2021, pp. 8748–8763, https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2103.00020
Applied Soft Computing 189 (2026) 114513 
18 
